'''= This is the english website derived from the Toma la Plaza movement established on 15 May in Spain.'''

Official website: http://www.tomalaplaza.net/

Blog at http://15mayrevolution.wordpress.com/



=Status=

==Report on the internationalisation efforts of the movement==

Report on the LISBON INTERNATIONAL MEETING of July 13th:

"International press: They compiled an archive of press divided in three
folders: one with international artcles about the local situation, another
about international movilisations and another about France, available to
visitors in the information table and updated every day. They also
compiled a digital archive with all the links along with the communication
team.

International action: Created since the repression of the Paris camp, a
group of 20 people started to camp in front of the French consulate in
Barcelona to dennounce. They did actions to support Morroccans, Sirians
and Italians too.

International networks: They made the first reviews of mobilisations and
camps in other  cities and contacts. Programmed live connections during
the assemblies with other camps, like Coimbra, Atenas, Leipzig, Lyon, o
New York. They received the foreign indignants coming from France, US,
etc. Composed mainly by geeks, it made a big effort to create platforms
like mailing lists(like cominterm and now squares), or n-1 groups for
local and global groups, as now the Howto Camp, that shares methodologies
for assemblies, pacific resiststance or legal issues, or coordinate
international accions, websites, irc channels, spamming the
europarlamentaries about the Pact of the Euro, etc.

We were also helping with the page takethesquare.net and created
acampadabcninternacional.wordpress.com, a facebook (acampada bcn comision
internacional and the twitter acampadabcn_int which allowed us to keep
autonomy till now, regardless of fights, burnouts of the communication
team or internet access. It is important to have several official media in
case of divisions, manipulation or censorship.

We also did the first international callouts to take squares, trying to
transform the mobilisation in support of the spanish people into local
fights about local issues.

We also did a big international call out for the 19  of June against the
Pact of the Euro, which was a big success.

We also collaborated with the other international callouts, like the anti
banks action of the Greeks or the information about the Italian
referendum.

We would inform every night about the international situation in the
assembly, along with the live streams.

Finally, the members also participated in other commissions, as
Dinamisation of the assembly, law, communication, night programs, etc. And
stayed in the plaza catalunya until the eviction even when the movement
decided to leave before.

On the road: In the beggining of july we started travelling through the
different cities. Our goals were: compiling information of other cities,
like reports about the camps (number of campers, assistants to assemblies,
etc) , recopilation of experts  and formation needs, practices sharing,
creating new international call outs and actions, make the network
stronger through face to face meetings, and informing about Barcelona  as
well.

Brussels: intervention in the Parliament during an event organised by
Democracy international. Participation on Brussels assemblies, divided in
several neighborhoods.  We started to write a howtocamp in every city,
based on interviews with the local indignants and our own observations,
that is starting to be interlinked as well."
(http://www.peoplesassemblies.org/2011/07/report-lisbon-international-meeting/)


=More Information=


'''On Spain:'''

#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/naomi-klein-on-camp-sols-lessons-for-true-democracy/2011/06/05
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/from-spanish-to-european-and-globalrevolution/2011/06/03
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/background-to-spanishrevolution-asambleabarrios-europeanrevolution/2011/05/30
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/spain-is-ground-zero-for-the-p2p-revolution/2011/05/29
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/constructing-participatory-democracy-in-the-spanishrevolution-camps/2011/05/23
#http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/analysis-of-the-may-15-movement-in-spain/2011/05/22


==Movement Resources==


More informations about international actions and strategies here : 

#our mail: comisiointernacional@gmail.com 
#our blog: http://acampadabcninternacional.wordpress.com/
#our tool: https://n-1.cc/pg/groups/104127/take-the-square-international/
#facebook: Acampada BCN Comision Internacional 
#twitter: @acampadabcn_int 
#Main website: http://takethesquare.net/
#Mailing-List: http://lists.takethesquare.net/mailman/listinfo/cominterm 
#Mailing-List: http://lists.takethesquare.net/mailman/listinfo/squares 
#Radio: http://radio.takethesquare.net 
#listen: http://giss.tv:8000/indignada.ogg.m3u 
#IRC Channel: /join #takethesquare on irc.freenode.net 
#Microblogging: #yeswecamp, #spanishrevolution, #worldrevolution, #globalrevolution, #takethesquare 
#Collaborative Editors: http://piratepad.net/qRwZC9Sd6k \
#Maps: http://www.thetechnoant.info/campmap/


[[Category:15M Movements]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Spain]]