

=Source=

* '''Article:  Cockshott, P. and Cottrell, A. and Dieterich, H. (2010) Transition to 21st century socialism in the European Union. In: Transition to 21st Century
Socialism in the European Union. CenturyXXI / Lulu.com, pp. 1-20.'''


URL = http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/25751/

This paper attempts to outline the economic steps that would be necessary to convert
a capitalist economy like the EU into a socialist one. We examine the issue in very
concrete terms and propose specific policy measures. The measures we propose differ
significantly from the tradition of 20th century European Social Democracy.

=Discussion=

==Proposed Program==

Cockshott, P. and Cottrell, A. and Dieterich, H.:

“Now, in the 21st century and in face of the most serious crisis of capitalism
since the 1930s, there is an historic opportunity to reassert the original ideals
and objectives of the socialist and democratic workers movements But this
cannot simply be a repetition of the past. 

In this proposal we try to develop an
alternative that differs in the following ways from past European Socialism:

1. We do not place the nationalisation of industry at the center of our
concerns; instead we emphasise a positive assertion of the rights of
labour to the full value added.

2. We propose a radical restructuring of monetary policy to move the
whole economy towards a non-money ‘equivalence economy’ based on
working time.

3. We envisage transition as taking place not at the level of the nation state
but within a democratised European Union.


Let us summarise key features of our conception of mature socialism:

1. The economy is based on the deliberate and conscious application of the
labour theory of value as developed by Adam Smith and Karl Marx. It is
a model in which consumer goods are priced in terms of the hours and
minutes of labour it took to make them, and in which each worker is paid
labour credits for each hour worked. The consistent application of this
principle eliminates economic exploitation.

2. Industry is publicly owned, run according to a plan and not for profit.

Retail enterprises for example, work on a break-even rather than profit
making basis. We envisage the transition to publicly owned enterprises
as being a gradual process that will occur aft er rather than before the
abolition of the wages system.

3. Decisions are taken democratically, at local, national and Union levels.

This applies in particular to decisions about the level of taxation and
state expenditure. Such democratic decision making is vital to prevent
the replacement of private exploitation with exploitation by the state.
In addition we take seriously Marx’s aphorism that the liberation of the
working classes must be the work of the working classes themselves. Th is
is refl ected in our advocacy of direct participative democracy rather than
cabinet or party government and also affects our philosophy of how a
transition to socialism has to take place. Instead of the old Social Democratic
emphasis on the direct action of the state in nationalising and taking over
private companies, we advocate the establishment of positive legal rights for
labour. These rights will, when collectively exercised by workers, bring to an
end the exploitation of labour by capital.”

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Policy]]
[[Category:Politics]]