

'''* Book (in preparation): A STATE OF PRE­: 21st Century Re­Alignments in Art and Politics. An anthology of art and theory. from the Re­Aligned Project. Ed. by Ivor Stodolsky and Marita Muukkonen. Sternberg Press, 2016.'''

URL = www.Re­Aligned.net

=Description=

“A State of Pre­” is a pluridisciplinary investigation into the conditions, subjectivities and
agencies provoking a realignment of art, thought and politics in the 21st century.

Drawing on its diverse participants while inviting new contributors this anthology gathers
together essays, theory and art related to the past three years of the Re­Aligned
Project.

As a thematic umbrella­ project dedicated to art and political movements advocating
change, resistance, rebellion or revolution in their respective societies, the Re­Aligned
Project has been defined by an ongoing series of workshops, exhibitions,
artist­in­residencies, seminars, conferences, street and public art festivals. An
interactive map of the project is found at www.Re­Aligned.net, which documents three
years of engagement across Europe, Russia, the Middle East and Northern Africa.

Future historians will judge whether the wave of revolts of our time bear comparison to
1640, 1789, 1848, 1968, or perhaps, following further major convulsions, will be seen as
the capitalist antipode to the communist collapse of 1989. What is clear today, is that we
live in a time of worldwide instability, where hegemonic government by consent is under
intense pressures due to the crises of transnational elites above, and the discontent of
vast majorities below, which are forced to bear the brunt of the ensuing problems.
Next to the economic and ecological crises of mondial scale, there are political conflicts
being played out in widely differing arenas which show remarkable structural similarities.

The notion of a non-­aligned ​positionality, which invokes the refusal of multiple
mainstream positions, describes one such common structural feature. An Egyptian,
Russian, Chinese or Cuban oppositional intellectual, for example, will reject (local)
authoritarianism while often simultaneously maintaining a highly critical stance vis­ a vis
(global) western forms of historical and/or current expansion and oppression. A
European or US Occupy activist, as much as an African or Latin American intellectual,
will similarly reject an authoritarian conception of communism while fighting the
rapacious logic of neoliberal capitalism. In all cases, concomitant with a clear
non­alignment with the outmoded mainstream social paradigms of the 20th century, we
see what we call re­alignments. Although a term kept deliberately open to multiple
readings, re­aligned ​initially describes a re­engagement with and re­merging of activist
and intellectual currents that are replacing the apathy and disillusionment, apolitical
irony, particularism, single­issue and identity politics of the previous epoch. It describes
the “third”, “fourth” or “fifth” ways being sought between vertical and horizontal forms of
organization, between particularist identities and unarticulated hybridities, between
difference and universalism, and so on.

The period preceding our current era, sometimes called postmodernity, saw a sustained
focus on cultural­ethnic issues, post­colonial and national­independence narratives,
post-­communist nation­building and religious revivals, gender related liberation
movements and also numerous new ways of reading popular and commercial culture
and society. While subverting and superimposing and making these configurations
clash, many power relations which postmodernist theory and art engaged with and
critiqued, however, were often paradoxically strengthened and reproduced in this same
period, rather than overcome.

Explanations for this require a re­orientation of perspectives. It has been argued that
precisely postmodernism’s aversion to “meta­narratives”, the “universal”, “reality” and
similar overarching conceptions, furnished the atomizing “conditions of ignorance”, so to
speak, for the macroeconomic neoliberal depredations of the past decades. Discussion
of general social and political structural movements remained out of fashion, suspect,
even unspeakable, in an environment where collective convictions and ideals were
ridiculed as simplistic, dangerous and antiquated, often forced to be couched in obscure
jargon, while the power­relations they decried took their heavy toll.

Over the past years, the clarity of the need for common agency has led us to speak of
the re­aligned approach as engaged in multilectic​thinking. Careful to avoid reversions
to single­issue, single­culture, single­tradition thinking, that is, abandoning diversity or
falling into undifferentiated universalism, this likewise multivalent term describes the
aim, amidst the maddening multiplicity of our times, to redevelop models for holistic
worldviews. The plethora of currents and movements which constitute re­alignments we
speak of, are a type of globalisation ‘from below’. Due to their undeveloped,
still­localised nature, we hence describe them as having a pre­mondial​agency​. This is
an agency for which politics, art and thought are only now beginning to imagine
structures for and give a language to.Following the near­collapse of global markets in 2007-8, multiple waves of resistance and rebellion against diverse forms of oppression, enslavement and injustice have
washed the world. From dramatic battles for basic freedoms and human rights, to
forceful anti­corruption movements, to rising rejection of corporate and state control and
disenfranchisement, to angry demands for advanced forms of equality and justice, not
dissimilar grievances and claims have been brought to “the square” in a wide range of
societies. Although nothing is certain, the chances are these grievances, and bold
proposals for solutions to them, will again cross critical thresholds with the amplitude of
ongoing ecological, financial, social and cultural crises.

In short, we wish to investigate the horizon which lies before us. We are in a state of
“pre­”. Contrary to the fin de siècle pessimism of what may be called the non­aligned
generation of the “post­”, re­aligned movements are part of a quest for a wider mondial
commons. Going beyond the ubiquitous "post­" of the outgoing epoch (post­war,
post­modern, post­Soviet, post­communist, post­ideological, post­history, post­colonial,
post­human, etc.) what may be called a re­aligned generation of the “pre­” ­ naturally
defined not by age but vision ­ seeks the proliferation of common orientations,
desirables and initiatives in face of mondial crises. The Re­Aligned Project has set its
focus on these currents of antecedent, not to say antediluvian predicament."

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Culture]]