
Many interesting webcasts available from the 22C3 Congress in December 2005


URL = http://22c3.fem.tu-ilmenau.de/index.php?action=home


=Description=

The annual "European hacker conference" organized by the Chaos Computer Club(CCC) is once again taking place in Berlin from December 27 to 30, 2005. For the first time, the research community for electronic media (Forschungsgemeinschaft elektronische Medien e.V./FeM e.V.), a student association from Ilmenau, is supporting the CCC this year by recording all presentations at the conference and making these available on the internet. Together with other helpers, members of FeM e.V. will be working together over the four days, 12 hours a day, in four lecture halls to videotape each and every presentation. In this way, those interested in information technology and who do not want to go to Berlin shortly after Christmas have the opportunity to at least virtually participate in the conference. The presentations are broadcasted live and will also be made available afterwards.

"The 22nd Chaos Communication Congress (22C3) is a four-day conference on technology, society, and utopias. The conference offers presentations and workshops on a variety of topics in the fields of information technology, computer security, internet, cryptography, and the critical-creative technology management and discussions on the impacts of technological development on society," explains the CCC. Located at the Berliner Congress Center, this year's conference is entitled "Private Investigations."

FeM e.V.'s mission is to make new media available for all to experience. Broadcasting cultural and educational events are part of the focus of their work. Apart from lectures, concerts, and other events, FeM e.V. also broadcasts plenary meetings of the Thuringian Landtag. Other projects of the research association include the "Studentenportal Ilmenau" (www.spi.tu-ilmenau.de) and the campus network "FeM-Net." 

=Catalog=

Consult the catalog here, at http://22c3.fem.tu-ilmenau.de/index.php?action=ondemand

James Burke recommends Joi Ito's lecture on Open Networks, http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/?p=6

[[Category:Webcasts]]