

=Description=

'A man named Enrico Dini is not only about to rev­o­lu­tion­ize the way we build houses and office build­ings — his tech­nol­ogy could poten­tially cause the largest eco­nomic rev­o­lu­tion in human history.

Inspired by Gaudi’s archi­tec­ture, he became a Civil Engi­neer and, later, began build­ing machines.  Yet he soon found that his imag­i­na­tion was con­strained by the phys­i­cal lim­its of mod­ern con­struc­tion tech­niques.  Con­crete and brick build­ings require a cer­tain degree of logis­tics and man­power, and human engi­neer­ing errors are often  rampant.

Tired of these phys­i­cal con­straints, Enrico invented and patented a full-scale 3D print­ing method that uses a high-tech glue to bind sand.  Enrico’s gen­eral con­cept is fairly sim­i­lar, how­ever: The printer is installed at the con­struc­tion site, and using a 3D blue­print designed by the archi­tect, it sys­tem­at­i­cally “prints out” a building.

And get this: the 3D printer could soon also be able to print more 3D print­ers.  His com­pany, Shape­ways, is already plan­ning a full-scale sculp­ture in Pisa, Italy. So in other words, this is all actu­ally happening.

Once these tech­nolo­gies are refined and begin to enter the mar­ket­place, entire eco­nomic mod­els will have to be rewrit­ten.  What will we do with mil­lions of suddenly-unemployed con­struc­tion work­ers when machines effec­tively ren­der them obso­lete? This dilemma requires our imme­di­ate atten­tion, as it stretches far beyond the worlds of con­struc­tion and real estate. As more and more human jobs are replaced by tech­nol­ogy, the unem­ployed masses and the world lead­ers gov­ern­ing them will most likely be ill-prepared for such changes. The eco­nomic fall­out could be disastrous."
(http://blog.ancientlasers.com/how-to-print-a-building-the-coming-real-estate-revolution/)



=More Information=

More [[Earth-Sculpting Tech­nolo­gies]]:

"Markus Kayser, who stud­ied 3D Fur­ni­ture and Prod­uct Design at Lon­don Met­ro­pol­i­tan Uni­ver­sity, is work­ing on another excit­ing and rev­o­lu­tion­ary tech­nol­ogy. His newest inven­tion, The [[Sun Cut­ter]], is a solar pow­ered machine that con­verts sand into glass-like sctruc­tures. In a world increas­ingly wor­ried about energy pro­duc­tion and short­ages of raw mate­ri­als, the Sun Cut­ter could be installed in a bar­ren desert to build entire struc­tures — all by itself.  This would be hugely impor­tant for devel­op­ing nations or refugees left home­less from a nat­ural disaster."
(http://blog.ancientlasers.com/how-to-print-a-building-the-coming-real-estate-revolution/)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]