
'''* Book: The Decentralized and Networked Future of Value Creation. 3D Printing and its Implications for Society, Industry, and Sustainable Development. Ed. by Ferdinand, Jan-Peter, Petschow, Ulrich, Dickel, Sascha. Springer, 2016'''

URL = https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783319316840

=Description=

"This book identifies, analyzes and discusses the current trends of digitalized, decentralized, and networked physical value creation by focusing on the particular example of 3D printing. In addition to evaluating 3D printing’s disruptive potentials against a broader economic background, it also addresses the technology’s potential impacts on sustainability and emerging modes of bottom-up and community-based innovation.  Emphasizing these topics from economic, technical, social and environmental perspectives, the book offers a multifaceted overview that scrutinizes the scenario of a fundamental transition: from a centralized to a far more decentralized system of value creation."


=Recommendation=

Recommended by Cindy Kohtala:

* Bottom-up Economics. [[Foundations of a Theory of Distributed and Open Value Creation]]. Redlich, Tobias (et al.)

In the Introduction to the book (written by the editors), page 13: “With these broadly drawn conceptual trajectories, a closer look at specific options for implementing these new modes of value creation reveals two typical approaches representing either business-centric top-down organization or network-based bottom-up processes. Business-oriented approaches to enhance flexibility in production do involve modifications to traditional production and consumption patterns, but the control of value creation ultimately remains in the hands of organizations, which increasingly adapt digitalized production processes to meet specific customer demands. In contrast, bottom-up approaches contrive to offer a fundamental alternative to the current producer-consumer model by placing responsibility, not only for production but also the creative momentum of the product design, in the hands of potential users or user groups; as such, these actors can be viewed as early adopters of a "radically decentralized system of production (Bauwens et al. 2012: 47 pp).”

Cindy Kohtala writes: I see it as from the industry point of view - how to acknowledge all that open-p2p action in the world and allow for it in business activities, incorporate it in mutual value creation and strategize it. Interesting diagram on page 41"



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Sustainable Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]