
'''* MA Thesis: 3D Printing, the Arts and Crafts Movement and the Democratization of Art. Lassi Patokorpi.
University of Tampere, School of Language, Translation and Literary Studies, English Philology, April 2014'''

URL = http://tampub.uta.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/95658/GRADU-1402572504.pdf


=Description=

'''1. Lassi Patokorpi:'''

"The industrial era revolutionized society, manufacture and art. The days of old, when
people lived in intimate communities in the countryside, when carpentry was a thriving trade
and people would make a large part of their own things were over. Are those days now
coming back? The Arts and Crafts Movement of the late 1800s, inspired by William Morris
and John Ruskin, strove to make art popular, as it had been in the Middle Ages, and create a
new, more beautiful world. Its ideas were aesthetic, democratic and socialist. The Movement
had a great influence, which was most distinctly visible in Germany in the 1920s, but in spite
of its influence all of the attempts to create a new popular art that would be widely shared by
the people failed. It is my claim that today in the 21st century, new technologies such as 3D
printing and revolutionary ideas like Open Source have created a new set of circumstances
that might finally bring us closer to achieving the dreams of William Morris and the
Movement he inspired.

In this thesis I am going to study the ideas of the Arts and Crafts Movement. More
specifically I will study its ideas of the democratization of art, and attempt to point out
similarities and differences that are apparent in the newly emerging 3D printing scene. I will
ultimately attempt to uncover a possible philosophical or ideological kinship between the
ideas behind these two historically distant and superficially very dissimilar phenomena. The
second half of the thesis will be an analysis of the ambivalent role of the machine and how it
relates to handcraft. The Arts and Crafts Movement had an adversarial view of the machine
and yet the machine is the prerequisite for 3D printing."
(http://tampub.uta.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/95658/GRADU-1402572504.pdf)


'''2. [[Lassi Patokorpi]]:'''

''The Arts and Crafts Movement'' of late 19th century England professed to democratize art and the production wares. The most prominent character of the Movement was poet, craftsman and socialist '''William Morris'''. I claim that today open source philosophy and peer production combined with 3D printing technology represents a similar philosophy about the democratization of production as the 19th century Arts and Crafts Movement. 3D printing is a nascent technology which allows the physical rendering (prototyping) of computer models. As The Arts and Crafts Movement was opposed to machines, I try to ascertain to what extent the Movement’s opposition toward the machine extends and what it is based on. Therefore, I discuss the machine’s two-sided role as, on the one hand, the destroyer of art, and on the other hand, the saviour of art. 

The Arts and Crafts Movement and 3D printing along with its related philosophies are connected by their endeavour to make the production of wares more accessible to ordinary people. They also share ideas about co-operative work, the strive for quality instead of profits, and a kind of socialism. In the upcoming future, if current trends persist, it is foreseeable that progress toward an Arts and Crafts vision of society will take place. The concepts of art, handcraft and machine work have been, and still are, in a state of constant change. This entails that other related concepts will change, too, such as the concepts of authenticity and uniqueness, which are definitive concepts of the era of handmaking, and they will begin to denominate new, contemporarily more relevant phenomena. My discussion of '''Lewis Mumford’s''' concepts (Megamachine, polytechnics, monotechnics) details that the role of the machine as the destroyer or the saviour of art is contingent on the ideology of the man who wields power over the machine. In this light the Movement’s opposition toward the machine appears more as opposition toward the prevailing capitalist system rather than as simple Luddism.

I study the Arts and Crafts Movement through the texts of its members paying special attention to the writings of its father character William Morris. As 3D printing is still an emerging field of technology my study material, aside from academic articles, also includes news articles, popular literature, lectures and interviews that I have conducted myself. Study material on peer production and open source is based on academic literature. This thesis falls under cultural criticism in which I apply comparative analysis.


=Discussion=

=Description=

Excerpt from the examination report, [[J. Toikkanen, K. McGinley]]:

The question of who does art belong to and who has the licence to produce art is one that has persisted through the ages. In his MA thesis, Lassi Patokorpi undertakes the task of observing this issue from the perspective of a specific cultural analogy. The thought of the Victorian author William Morris and the famous Arts and Crafts Movement he helped inaugurate is set in comparison with 21st-century technological developments such as 3D printing, and the theme of democratization of art is identified as the one connecting the different eras. 

As Patokorpi tells us, in terms of methodology, his MA thesis "falls within cultural criticism, applying comparative analysis based on a wide range of materials" (p. 3.). It follows that no specific theory is applied, and instead, Patokorpi sensibly focuses on making the all-important connection between the Victorian period and the 21st century as convincing as possible. For the purpose sections 3 and 5 that pivot on Morris and John Ruskin, and their lasting impact on the Arts and Crafts Movement, are respectively followed by sections 4 and 6 that clarify the corresponding phenomena in today's world. In addition to 3D printing, they include the "new, arguably socialistic ideas" (p. 25) of peer production and open source practices which, according to Patokorpi, recall the 19th-century ideals of Morris and Ruskin.

In section 7, the final part of the discussion, the thematic arc of the democratization of art is further traced from the 1800s to the 2000s through authors such as Frank Lloyd Wright, Walter Benjamin and Lewis Mumford who have been selected for their influential views on the role of the "machine" in this very process. Patokorpi's point is that whereas thinkers like Morris and Ruskin rejected the machine, later intellectuals embraced the potential it proved for the democratization of art, and this insight culminates in Patokorpi's claim about the revolutionary potential embedded in the 21st-century technologies. For instance, he argues that, by redistributing the capitalist division of labour, 3D printing could "transcend debasing industrial working conditions" (p. 65) in which the worker is subservient to the machine. By the same token, should peer production and open source practices become the presiding norm in today's world, they might revive the discussed Victorian ideals by advocating "a kind of socialism that proposes the common good and good quality products in themselves as more important than individual gain and profits" (p. 73), as Patokorpi points out in the conclusion.


=Excerpts=

==Peer Production and the Logic of the Artist==

Lassi Patokorpi:

"The emergence of peer production and open source practices in the computer world have
shown that the conventional methods of organizing labour and running a business are not the
only viable options available. The open source practice, based on open access and free-willed
participation, baffles corporate logic because it represents almost an opposite ideology:
sharing instead of proprietary rights and voluntary labour instead of wage-driven work
relationships. An open source community has, instead of pecuniary aims, more idealistic aims
of creating good products for the sake of creating good products, something that does not fit
into the mechanics of profit-driven entities. This new economic logic is called hyperproductivity
by Bauwens (2009, 128). Hyper-productivity conveys “drive for absolute
quality” (Bauwens, 2009 128). The phenomenon of hyper-productivity is also visible in more
traditional self-managed worker co-operatives, where the products created often are of too
high quality, and do consequently not meet the market demands (Holmström 1985, 10, more
on worker co-operatives in section 6.4).

In my view this hyper-productivity, central to the open source culture and peer
production, most likely derives from voluntary work. In other words, people collaborating in
open source communities are most likely motivated to create products that respond to actual
end-user needs – simply because they are themselves also end-users of the products – and 
they believe they are working towards a goal that is intrinsically valuable: a good product. In
his historical account of medieval practices in arts and crafts, Morris points out that artists
created their products to suit real needs (1889, 67–68). This is likely also a motivating factor
in peer production communities. Moreover, workers’ co-operatives share the same objective
of meeting consumers’ real needs, instead of catering to “false needs simulated by
advertising” (Holmström 1985, 8). Peer producers, and to some degree workers in cooperatives,
are exceedingly autonomous (Benkler and Nissenbaum 2006, 405–406). Ideally,
it would seem to imply that people in peer production communities contribute only to causes
that they see worthy of contribution.

This logic differs from wage-driven labour where the worker is, quite obviously, most
often only motivated by salary. This dissimilarity between market-oriented and qualityoriented
work is also apparent in Morris’s criticism of the industrial production of the 19th
century. According to Morris, the ethic of the man of commerce, who is only geared toward
the attainment of profit, is different from that of the artist who only aims to produce items as
well as he possibly can. 


Consider the following quotation from Morris’s lecture, “The Arts
and Crafts of To-day”

- To the commercial producer the actual wares are nothing; their adventures in the
market are everything. To the artist the wares are everything; his market he need not
trouble himself about. (2000 [1889], 68)


The logic of the artist that Morris describes here bears resemblance to Bauwens’s hyperproductivity.

The artist and the peer producer are oriented towards the product, not the
market. According to Morris, when the artisan is oriented towards the product in an industrial
setting as a wageworker he or she loses touch with the wares themselves that he or she
produces. As a result, the wageworker sees the wares only as a source of livelihood (1889,
66). This means that the business model itself eradicates the will or at the very least the 
possibility of crafting proper products. Morris regards this type of commercialism as
destructive to art. But how realistic is it to disregard the wage-oriented approach and pursue
more idealistic and altruistic aims? At the moment, peer production is a system that operates
within the capitalist system, and is to a large extent dependent on it. According to Bauwens
(2009, 130), the current system allows people to operate outside of the commodity and wage
logic, but only as a hobby. Peer production is a system that is “sustainable collectively, but
not individually” (Bauwens 2009, 131). Thus perhaps the biggest problem that faces the peer
producer and the logic of the artist is the difficulty of its incorporation into the capitalist
system. At the moment, peer production creates use value in the form of wealth (social
capital) but the larger part of this use value stays outside of the market economy because the
market economy operates around money and profit, not wealth. The market operates only on
the margins of peer production (Bauwens 2009, 134). The question remains: is peer
production at all possible inside the capitalist system which operates this way?

Peer production is a type of social production. People take part in producing
something for the common good (Benkler and Nissenbaum 2006, 396) and the whole modus
operandi of a peer production society is based on – and revolves around – mutual cooperation
of peers. Because peer produced products are created in co-operation with the
society, peer production reflects the needs of the whole society, and the created product does
not only serve to increase profits of a single entity, the latter point being a source of much of
Morris’s criticism. In this regard peer production resembles closely Morris’s ideals. People
are contributing to purposes they find worthwhile and taking part in the collaborative process
of creating things, not just being passive consumers, is an act of being an artist in the
Morrisian sense. The independence and autonomy of individuals collaborating in peer
production, and them acting largely outside the economic sphere, would seem to guarantee
that things produced are of actual use to the peer producers themselves. In the Morrisian
sense this guarantees that the product, or the art, that is produced is useful, and serves to 28
minister either to the body or the soul. In short, if you produce what you need, you produce
something useful."


==Conclusion==

Lassi Patokorpi:

William Morris was an artist, craftsman and socialist who rebelled against capitalism and the
ensuing culture of inequality. Morris held that art was not the preserve of geniuses but
belonged to everyone. Because Morris defined art as everything man-made, including fine art
and crafting, his concept of art is translatable to production or manufacture as well as to the
contemporary sense of the word art. John Ruskin was fiercely antagonistic toward the
machine. Morris, too, was in principle against the machine, but admitted that it could
ameliorate exhausting and wearisome work. Yet Morris’s and Ruskin’s disdain for the
machine should not simplistically be treated as Luddism, or outright opposition to
technology. They opposed the machine because in the ruthless hands of the capitalist system
it oppressed workers, seeing the production of commodities merely as a source of profit.
The Arts and Crafts Movement followed Morris’s and Ruskin’s teachings of art and
society, but was slightly more lenient in their attitude toward the machine. Later in the 20th
century Lewis Mumford formulated the concepts of the monotechnics and polytechnics
which separate technology into oppressive forms of technology and forms of technology that
support natural human development, respectively. Mumford’s view highlights the fact that
technology is not inherently good or bad but is instead dependent on its user’s philosophy.

What peer production, the idea of the Arts and Crafts workshop, as well as workers’
co-operatives, all share is a similar effort toward the attainment of quality for its own sake
and the appreciation of co-operation. The underlying idea behind these phenomena seems to
be a kind of socialism that proposes that the common good and good quality products in
themselves are more important than individual gain and profits. In the 21st century, these
ideas are subversive to the current economic system. At the same time, these ideas are
reminiscent of the pre-industrial conventions of manufacture and organization.

The capitalist logic has led to severe environmental concerns and distorted the way
society perceives the value of commodities. 3D printing, peer production and the open source 74
philosophy could change the way the economy (base) is organized, and therefore also change
the culture (superstructure) and its view of material objects. It would also reduce wasteful
mass manufacturing and fossil fuel reliant transportation, both of which are important causes
of environmental decay, but at the same time induce wasteful manufacturing behaviour due
to the ease by which 3D printers function.

3D printing has definite revolutionary potential. It promises a new way of
manufacturing items and along with the open movement and peer production, a new way of
organizing an economy. In an ideal world 3D printing would be able to give everyone access
to the means of production, and as a consequence, democratize production or at least make
the connection between the maker and the user more intimate. In the end, 3D printing could
turn out to be a technology that would support human development; it could be polytechnics.
Different projects that aim to take the society in this direction have already been established,
such as the WikiHouse project which proposes to give everyone the possibility of
constructing buildings. The ideas behind these projects are reminiscent of the philosophy or
ideology of the Arts and Crafts Movement of creating a public and democratic art.

Designing 3D models could become the primary occupation of craftsmen who would
practice digital craftsmanship. The machine in this situation is very different from that which
Morris criticized in the 19th century, as it does not relegate workers into performing menial,
repetitive tasks. Morris defined art as pleasurable work, and digital craftsmanship can indeed
be considered pleasurable activity. Morris’s definition also entails, however, that the end
product is also the product of human hands. This is not the case with 3D printing.

The question whether a reproduction can be art was brought up by Walter Benjamin.

Benjamin formulated the concept of aura which was based on the uniqueness of handmade
objects. Benjamin’s concept of authenticity is problematic because it is a product of a bygone
historical understanding of objects. In today’s world authenticity of objects does not
necessarily need to rely on uniqueness. In spite of that, even reproducible objects appear to 75
sustain some level of uniqueness. All reproductions are not as valuable, even if they are in
some sense exactly the same. This is because humans ascribe authenticity to objects and thus
authenticity is not a material attribute of the object.

Ruskin found the value and beauty of handwork in its imperfection. Morris believed
artisans could communicate something salient through their work. This would seem to
suggest that a handmade object is valuable because it can convey humanity (Morris would
perhaps call it ‘the human spirit’) and tell something about its maker. The question arises
whether 3D printed objects can convey a human relationship in the same way. The matter
gets even more complicated when computerized design and mathematical algorithms appear
on stage. Computerized design and certain algorithms can simulate imperfections created by
handwork or organic forms and patterns that can be found in nature and which can only be
recreated with 3D printers.

It is evident that the concepts of art, craftsmanship, reproduction, and authenticity
have transformed through the centuries. During this time technological developments have
pushed the boundaries of these concepts. In the 21st century post-industrial world 3D printing
will move these boundaries again. Further inquiries into the subject of democratization of art,
and into the relationship between man, the machine, and nature, ought to be made. The
Deutscher Werkbund and the German Bauhaus School of the 1920s–1930s and their role in
the development of the concept of the democratization of art would be a fitting continuation
for the work done in this thesis. Finally, I think William Morris and Lewis Mumford warrant
more academic attention as they continue to offer valuable perspectives into the societal and
cultural issues of the post-industrial world."

=Bibliography=

Works Cited:

Anderson, Chris. Makers, the New Industrial Revolution. New York: Random House
Business Books, 2012.

Ashbee, Charles Robert. An Endeavor Towards the Teaching of John Ruskin and William
Morris. London: Edward Arnold, 1901. Internet Archive. Available at
https://archive.org/details/endeavortowardst00ashb [Accessed 9 April 2014]

Ashbee, Charles Robert. A Few Chapters in Workshop Re-Construction and Citizenship.
London: The Guild and School of Handicraft, 1894. Internet Archive. Available at
https://archive.org/details/fewchaptersinwor00ashbrich [Accessed 9 April 2014]

Atkinson, Paul. “Orchestral Manoeuvres in Design.” Open Design Now. Eds. Bas van Abel,
et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/orchestral-manoeuvres-in-design-paul-atkinson/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Atkinson, Paul. “Do it Yourself: Democracy and Design.”

Benkler, Yochai, and Helen Nissenbaum. “Commons–based Peer Production and Virtue.”
Journal of Political Philosophy 14.4 (2006): 394–419.

Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks. How Social Production Transforms Markets and
Freedom. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2006.

Boos, Florence and William Boos. “The Utopian Communism of William Morris”. History of
Political Thought. 7.3 (1986): 489–510.

Ceraso, Antonio, and Jeff Pruchnic. “Introduction: Open Source Culture and Aesthetics.”
Criticism 53.3 (2011): 337–75.

de Bruijn, Erik. “On the Viability of the Open Source Development Model for the Design of
Physical Objects: Lessons Learned from the RepRap Project.” MSc Thesis. University of
Tilburg, 2010. The Netherlands.


Greenstead, Mary, ed. An Anthology of the Arts and Crafts Movement: Writings by Ashbee,
Lethaby, Gimson and their Contemporaries. Hampshire: Lund Humphries. 2005.

“Home Factory: 3D Printing to Change our Shopping Habit.” Voice of Russia. 9 Jan 2014.
Available at http://voiceofrussia.com/news/2014_01_09/Home-factory-3D-printing-tochange-our-shopping-habit-0826/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]78

Huang, Samuel, et al. “Additive Manufacturing and its Societal Impact: A Literature
Review.” International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology 67.5-8 (2013):
1191–203.

Kaur, Satwant. “How is “Internet of the 3D Printed Products” Going to Affect our Lives?”
IETE Technical Review 29.5 (2012): 360–4.

Kennedy, Gabrielle. “Joris Laarman’s Experiments with Open Design.” Open Design Now.
Eds. Bas van Abel, et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/joris-laarmans-experiments-with-open-sourcedesign-gabrielle-kennedy/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Klaassen, Roel, and Peter Troxler. “Do it with Droog.” Open Design Now. Eds. Bas van
Abel, et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/do-it-with-droog-roel-klaassen-peter-troxler/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Kurman, Melba. Skype Interview conducted by Lassi Patokorpi. 21 Oct 2013.

Liedes, Jarkko. “Kädet Ylös! Valmistamisen Vallankumous – Revolverista 3DTulostukseen.”
Tieteessä tapahtuu 31.4 (2013): 44–50.

Lipson, Hod, and Melba Kurman. Fabricated: The New World of 3D Printing. Somerset, NJ,
USA: Wiley, 2013.

Magnani, Lorenzo. Morality in a Technological World. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2007.

Marx, Leo. “Lewis Mumford: Prophet of Organicism.” (1989) MIT. Available at
http://web.mit.edu/STS/pubs/pdfs/MIT_STS_WorkingPaper_2_Marx.pdf [Accessed 9 April
2014]79

Mitcham, Carl, and Robert Mackey, eds. Philosophy and Technology. New York: The Free
Press, 1972.

Moilanen, Jarkko, and Tere Vadén. “3D Printing Community and Emerging Practices of Peer
Production.” First Monday (2013): Oct 29 2013.

Morris, William. “Art and Socialism.” 1884A. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1884/as/as.htm [Accessed 9 April 2014]
---. “Art under Plutocracy.” 1883. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1883/pluto.htm [Accessed 9 April 2014]
---. “The Art of the People.” 1882A. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
<http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1882/hopes/hopes.htm#chap-2 [Accessed 9
April 2014]
---. “The Arts and Crafts of to-Day.” [1889] The Theory of Decorative Art: An Anthology of
European & American Writings, 1750-1940. Ed. Isabelle Frank. New Haven and London:
Yale University Press for The Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts,
Design, and Culture, 2000. 61–70.
---. “The Beauty of Life.” 1882B. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
<http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1882/hopes/chapters/chapter3.htm [Accessed
9 April 2014]
---. “A Factory As It Might Be.” 1884B. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1884/justice/10fact1.htm [Accessed 9 April
2014]
---. “Feudal England.” 1888. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1888/signs/chapters/chapter3.htm [Accessed 9
April 2014]
---. “How We Live and How We Might Live.” 1884C. Marxists Internet Archive. Available
at http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1884/hwl/hwl.htm [Accessed 9 April 2014]
---. News from Nowhere, An Epoch of Rest. [1890] New York: Dover. 2004.
---. “The Lesser Arts.” 1882C. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1882/hopes/chapters/chapter1.htm [Accessed
9 April 2014] 80
---. “The Prospects of Architecture in Civilisation.” 1882D. Marxists Internet Archive.
Available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1882/hopes/hopes.htm#chap-5
[Accessed 9 April 2014]
---. “The Revival of Handicraft.” [1888] The Theory of Decorative Art: An Anthology of
European & American Writings, 1750-1940. Ed. Isabelle Frank.New Haven and London:
Yale University Press for The Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts,
Design, and Culture. 2000. 169–177.
---. “The Socialist Ideal: Art.” 1891. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1891/ideal.htm [Accessed 9 April 2014]
---. “Some Hints On Pattern-Designing.” 1881. Marxists Internet Archive. Available at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1881/hints.htm [Accessed 9 April 2014]
---. “Statement of Principles of the Hammersmith Socialist Society.” 1890. Marxists Internet
Archive. Available at https://www.marxists.org/archive/morris/works/1890/hammer.htm
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Mumford, Lewis. “Art in the Machine Age.” The Saturday Review of Literature. 9 Sept 1928.
Unz.org. Available at http://www.unz.org/Pub/SaturdayRev-1928sep08-00102 [Accessed 9
April 2014]

Mumford, Lewis. “Authoritarian and Democratic Technics.” Technology and Culture 5.1
(1964): 1–8.

Mumford, Lewis. “Technics and the Nature of Man” [1966]. Mitcham, Carl, and Robert
Mackey, eds. Philosophy and Technology. New York: The Free Press, 1972.

O’Sullivan, Patrik. “Morris the Red, Morris the Green – a Partial Review.” The Journal of
William Morris Studies 19.3 (2011).

Parvin, Alastair. Architecture for the people by the people. Technology, Entertainment,
Design (TED), 2013. Online video clip. Available at
http://www.ted.com/talks/alastair_parvin_architecture_for_the_people_by_the_people
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Patokorpi, Erkki. “Role of Abductive Reasoning in Digital Interaction.” Åbo Akademi, 2006:
Åbo. Ph.D. Thesis. Available at
http://www.cspeirce.com/menu/library/aboutcsp/patokorpi/abduction.pdf [Accessed 9 April
2014]81

Pevsner, Nikolaus. Pioneers of Modern Design. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991.
Prettejohn, Elizabeth. Art of the Pre-Raphaelites. London: Tate Publishing, 2007.

Ruskin, John. The genius of John Ruskin. Ed. John D. Rosenberg. United States: University
of Virginia. 1998.

Ruskin, John. “The Nature of Gothic.” [1853] On Art and Life. Ed. Clive Wilmer. England:
Penguin, 2004A. Penguin Books of Great Ideas.

Ruskin, John. The Two Paths. Ed. Christine Roth. Indiana: Parlor, 2004B.

Shiner, Larry. The Invention of Art: A Cultural History. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2001.

Spicer, Arwen. “Toward Sustainable Change: The Legacy of William Morris, George
Bernard Shaw, and H.G. Wells in the Ecological Discourse of Contemporary Science
Fiction.” Ph.D. Thesis. University of Oregon, 2005.

Stoll, Steven. Larding the Lean Earth: Soil and Society in Nineteenth-Century America. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003.

Swer, Gregory Morgan. “Technics and (Para)Praxis: The Freudian Dimensions of Lewis
Mumford’s Theories of Technology.” History of the Human Sciences 17.4 (2004): 45–68.

Thackara, John. “Into the Open.” Open Design Now. Eds. Bas van Abel, et al. Amsterdam:
Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/into-the-openjohn-thackara/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Thompson, E. P. A Lecture to the Williams Morris Society. 1959. Marxists Internet Archive.
Available at http://www.marxists.org/archive/thompson-ep/1959/william-morris.htm
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Triggs, Oscar Lovell. Chapters in the History of the Arts and Crafts Movement. Chicago: The
Bohemia Guild of the Industrial Art League, 1902. Internet Archive. Available at
https://archive.org/details/cu31924032649828 [Accessed 9 April 2014]2

Troxler, Peter. “The Beginning of a Beginning of the Beginning of a Trend.” Open Design
Now. Eds. Bas van Abel, et al. Amsterdam: Bis Publisher, 2011. Available at
http://opendesignnow.org/index.php/article/the-beginning-of-a-beginning-of-the-beginningof-a-trend-peter-troxler/
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Valve Corporation. Handbook for New Employees. Valve Corporation. 2012. Available at
http://newcdn.flamehaus.com/Valve_Handbook_LowRes.pdf [Accessed 9 April 2014]

Vance, Ashlee. “3-D Printing Spurs a Manufacturing Revolution.” New York Times. 13 Sep
2010. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/14/technology/14print.html [Accessed 9
April 2014]

WikiHouse. Available at http://www.wikihouse.cc/ [Accessed 9 April 2014]

Witzel, Morgen, ed. Encyclopedia of the History of American Management. Bristol:
Thoemmes Continuum. 2005.

Wolff, Richard. “Yes, there is an alternative to capitalism: Mondragon shows the way.” The
Guardian. 24 June 2012. Available at
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/24/alternative-capitalism-mondragon
[Accessed 9 April 2014]

Wright, Frank Lloyd. “The Art and Craft of the Machine.” [1901] The Theory of Decorative
Art: An Anthology of European & American Writings, 1750-1940. Ed. Isabelle Frank.New
Haven and London: Yale University Press for The Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the
Decorative Arts, Design, and Culture, 2000. 201–212.


[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]