
* 3D PRINTERS, THE THIRD INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION AND THE DEMISE OF CAPITALISM. By Ciaran Tully. Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, vol. 12, no. 1, 2016

URL = http://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/viewFile/487/883


=ABSTRACT=

"Recently some authors have discussed the idea that capitalism is nearing its end
and will be replaced by a post-capitalist society through the forces created by new technologies.

This paper will specifically address 3D printers, which have the potential to change the way
manufacturing occurs. This paper will argue that such deterministic arguments, which mirror
ideas present at the beginning of the twentieth century, are incorrect in their predictions that
they will overthrow capitalism, and are corrosive to radical political action because of the
fatalism they engender. It will argue that these notions do not hold up to scrutiny in purely
economic focused terms (in an economic analysis based primarily on the economics of Karl
Marx’s Capital), but also are faulty when one acknowledges and analyses the problem from a
more complex view of society as argued in Arran Gare’s formulation of Hegel’s three dialectics
within society, and Gramsci’s formulation of Ideological Hegemony and the dialectic of
consent and domination."


=Excerpts=

From the introduction:

"In this paper it will be argued that while 3D printers might cause parts of the
means of production to congeal in a new form, they will neither fundamentally sever
the power relations exercised within the dialectic of labour (the economic sphere of
society) nor without (through the other spheres of society – culture, language, ideology
etc.). It will be further argued that any political strategy devoid of consideration for the
other aspects of society that are irreducible to the dialectic of labour will simply fall
into the same trap that vulgar Marxism historically fell into; a sense of deterministic
fatalism. Further, the existence of 3D printers will not overcome the myriad of
relations that tie society to the capitalist model and thus will not create a
fundamentally new ordering of society.
In regards to the views of those on the left, the idea behind some inevitable change
to a post-capitalist society due to 3D printers, while seductive, is Vulgar Marxism
reborn. In his book, A Revolution in the Making,4 Guy Rundle details and flirts with,5 but
does not embrace fully,6 some of these deterministic ideas being put forward by some
members of the left involved in or watching the development of the 3D Printer.
Specifically, those involved in the so called ‘Makerspaces’, a movement that in some
respects can be seen as attempting to construct economies partially outside of
capitalism; some of whom see the new technology as creating forces capitalism will
inevitably succumb to.7
Another, perhaps more subtle example (though not focused on 3D printers
specifically) of this deterministic thought can be seen in the recent article in The
Guardian, “The end of capitalism has begun” by Paul Mason. Mason predicts that “…

- [Capitalism] will be abolished by creating something more dynamic that exists, at first almost unseen
within the old system, but which will break through, reshaping the economy around new values and
behaviours.” The reason that parts of this can be interpreted as being in a similar vein
to vulgar Marxism (though it is even more removed from Marxist thought than earlier
examples) is because of the fatalism that Mason’s approach engenders by his assertion
that no revolutionary activity is needed to overthrow capitalism, and that such
counter-capitalist historical changes will simply emerge naturally and overcome
capitalism. The victory over capitalism is something presented as a priori, as happening
regardless of human agency.

Similar deterministic ideas as those outlined above had some popularity in the late
19th and early 20th centuries on the radical left. Proponents of these believed that the
forces of industrialisation inevitably lead to a breakdown of capitalism due to the crises it
generates as part of its normal functioning, and this in turn will inevitably lead to
socialism and then communism. It would be foolish to disregard the potential of
technology to change societies, since the first Industrial Revolution was one of the
largest changes to society in human history. However, the trap to avoid is not to
descend, in Hegelian terms, into the absolute primacy of the dialectic of labour above
recognition and representation. As Arran Gare argues in Nihilism Inc., human society is
more complicated than simply being driven solely by the dialectic of labour.

Additionally, this paper will argue that any claim that the third Industrial Revolution
will break capitalism does not make sense even when viewed solely through a Marxist
analysis rooted firmly in the dialectic of labour."


==The three dialectics==

"In his Jena lectures and in parts of later works, Hegel outlined how the three
dialectics of recognition, labour and representation are central in understanding the
development of humans in society. Recognition describes how the development of
self-consciousness takes place through an interactive process in which one sees oneself
in the recognition of the other. In the Hegelian scheme of development it is not
merely the dialectic of labour that is part of the development of the ‘self’ and the
world, but also cultural interactions, which shape and give boundaries to the ‘I’ and
guide its moral development and outlook (recognition). Representation refers to how
language both structures and is structured by our thought. Both are phenomena and
processes irreducible to the dialectic of labour, even though they necessarily interact as
forces within the same world. The third dialectic process, which for Marx was the
most important, is the dialectic of labour. It refers to the sphere of human
development shaped by economic relations and technologies that are necessary for
human society to continue and renew itself. It was considered the most important for
Marx because human all beings required base of material goods in order to perpetuate
their existence, and because Marx analysed how the power of the revolutionary
bourgeoisie which allowed for the transition from feudalism to capitalism was based in
the social power that they obtained through a change in social relations of
production; or in other words, a development in the dialectic of labour. Although
Marx’s thought was not entirely consistent on the subject of determinism; sometimes
appearing in favour, sometimes not. I would agree, however, with Gare that the core
of Marx’s thought must be interpreted as non-deterministic, since at base it is about
overcoming the economic relations which serve to cripple human potential."

==3D Printing cannot overcome capitalism==

"So what would technology capable of undermining the capitalist relation look like?
What would break “M –> C –> ΔM” relation? The answer is a removal of the
component in the capitalist relation that transforms M into ΔM; the valorising
component of labour. Capitalism would only end in a technological-deterministic
fashion if all labour were removed from the production of goods; not only in
production, or even harvesting – but also in development and services and any other
part of human life in which people do labour that is deemed socially necessary and is 
unable to be automated. A critical threshold only intervenes to undermine the
mechanic of capitalism in a ‘deterministic sense’ at a point of full automation in every
sphere of socially necessary labour. Something that is either a far, far distant concept,
or impossible due to the likely asymptomatic nature of automation. Therefore, even in
an analysis centred solely within the dialectic of labour, the claims that 3D printers will
dissolve capitalism is at best, something that would require far more technology and
automation than perhaps even the most committed ‘Technocopian’ is predicting –
full automation.

There is also no guarantee that such a post-capitalist society would not be even
worse for the majority of the world’s people than present conditions. Not in the
bourgeois-conservative Panglossian sense that the present is the ‘best of all possible
worlds’19, but rather that if the ideological constellation (property, legal system,
bourgeois sentiments of entitlement, etc.) of today persisted into that new ‘social’20
productive relation, those who had been capitalists would still own everything but then
be under no compulsion to see to the regeneration of the, now ex, proletariat – since
the latter would be superfluous to their production. The situation here changes in
relation to money. 

Whereas Marx in Capital said:

- Whenever there is a general disturbance of the mechanism [the flow of capital,
i.e. payments], no matter what its cause, money suddenly and immediately
changes over from its merely nominal shape, money of account, into hard cash.

Profane commodities can no longer replace it. The use-value of commodities
becomes valueless, and their value vanishes in the face of their own form of value.
The bourgeois, drunk with prosperity and arrogantly certain of himself, has just
declared that money is a purely imaginary creation. ‘Commodities alone are
money,’ he said. But now the opposite cry resounds over the markets of the
world: only money is a commodity. As the hart pants after fresh water, so pants
his soul after money, the only wealth.

Instead, there occurs a negation of this concept under full automation, as the
ability to produce commodities becomes something transcending the purchasing
power of money. No longer is money the “great leveller”.22 Social power flows in this
scenario from ownership of the fully automated means of production, the commodities
produced mere finitudes compared to its infinite. The social power of money is eroded
by the very dynamics of capitalism is pushed towards full automation. Whether or not
there would be forces in society capable of negating this negativity (i.e. breaking the
concept of ownership) is unclear and doubtful. Since the revolutionary potential of the
proletariat no longer exists in this rapidly-becoming dystopia. In this nightmarish
world of the late-bourgeoisie, then ‘neo aristocracy’, the only hope of the landless and
asset-less ex-proletariat might be in relying on the charity and ‘good nature’ of the
late-capitalist. And since they would have inherited the hegemonic ideological
constellation from the capitalist epoch, perhaps the best that the majority could hope
for is that Peter Singer’s The Most Good You Can Do becomes a best seller among these
neo-aristocrats.

Returning from this possible future dystopia to the prospect of 3D printers, there is
another reason within the dialectic of labour why the demise of factory style
manufacturing will not be the death knell of capitalism. Manufacturing does not spin
cotton or cobble shoes out of the conjunction of dead and living labour power alone
(i.e the manufacturing machines and the worker’s labour). It also requires raw materials
that have been harvested, by machine or human hands. This is no different
with 3D printers, regardless of where the manufacture occurs. Additionally,
commodity chains, for resources only available in a few parts of the world, would still
be necessary in order for commodities to be ‘printed’. On an individual level, a
capitalist invested in the current technologies of manufacturing might find their
factories and machines radically devalued, and no longer able to continue advancing
their capital in that particular process. On a more widespread level, the shift to
dispersed manufacturing could be disastrous for the stability of the market – as huge
amounts of capital (embodied in the then-obsolete factory process) would suddenly
devalue and remove a large chunk of the ‘total goods’ comprising the world economy,
while simultaneously millions of people would be put out of work and be unable to
‘participate’ to the same extent in the flow of commodities.

But other capitalists – the mining magnate, the landowner invested in agribusiness,
the transnationals who ‘rent’ access to precious resources from the Congolese warlord
by paying with weapons25 - i.e. those engaged in extracting profit from workers and
wealth from nature in a non-manufacturing capacity – would be as successful (they are
simply selling to a larger number of people), or even more successful. Since now they
are not dealing with another large capitalist eager to keep their own costs down, but
instead with individuals or communities with less ability to resist in an economic arena
due to their fragmentation.

Just as previous automation did not lead irrevocably to higher wages, or ‘free
people’ to perform other, less automatable jobs,26 the idea that the ability to reduce
scarcity necessarily leads to a reduction in scarcity for the masses and a more equal
distribution of wealth is naïve and contrary to the historical evidence. Indeed
automation has had either the opposite effect or was bypassed due to cheap labour
available in poor countries.27 Humans already have the capacity to eradicate scarcity
of basic goods; a recent report by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the
United Nations showed that enough food is wasted to feed two billion people, more
than enough to feed the estimated 800 million hungry human beings on the planet.

However, it must be stressed that 3D printers, like other forms of automation, do
contain a certain emancipatory potential. The potential for human beings to live at
high material standards in egalitarian relations. However, as the abovementioned UN
report details, this potentiality has certainly not been realised under capitalist relations.

We see similar technological optimism again in regards to the development of
technology itself. However, technology does not exist and develop as separate from the
interacting economic and cultural institutions within society. This idea is in contrast to
the simplistic way Henryk Skolimowski attempts to define technology in The Structure of
Thinking in Technology in which Skolimowski asserts that technology is the progression
of refinement and increased efficiency. "


=References=

* Chris Anderson, Makers: The New Industrial Revolution (New York: Crown Business 2012), pp. 33-42. 

* Guy Rundle, ‘All Power to the Makerspaces: 3-D printing in its current form could be a return to “small
is beautiful” drudgery, but it has the potential to do much more’, Jacobin, Issue 17,
https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/04/3d-printing-industrial-revolution-rundle/ (Accessed 30/05/2015). 

* Thomas Birtchnell and William Hoyle, 3D Printing for Development in the Global South The 3D4D Challenge
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan 2014), p. 52. 

* Guy Rundle, A Revolution in the Making: 3D Printing, Robots and the Future, (South Melbourne: Affirm Press
2014).

* Paul Mason, “The end of capitalism has begun” in The Guardian, 17/7/2015.
http://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/17/postcapitalism-end-of-capitalism-begun (Accessed
30/05/2015).



[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Politics]]