
'''= co-working place and community for crypto nomads, based in Chiang Mai, Thailand.'''

URL = https://www.4seas.io/en

=Description=

"4seas is a crypto nomad start-up society with its first site in Chiang Mai, aiming to foster the integration of crypto technology and innovative societies. We provide an ideal workspace, living environment, and activity space for digital and crypto nomads, allowing members to experience the world while transforming it with new technologies.

We practice on-chain governance through crypto tokens, DAO, and other methods, recording the micro-history of the society and accumulating iterative methodologies. We encourage members to think, discuss, and make decisions collaboratively, establishing and enhancing a sustainable and positively impactful crypto nomad start-up society. In the post-nation-state era, we explore solutions for digital personal sovereignty for future global citizens and the citizenship of network state.

4seas' values are rooted in sustainability, open-source, freedom, and diversity. We firmly believe that a healthy society culture depends on the collective safeguarding of these values by all members.

We welcome you to Chiang Mai, Thailand, the capital of the ancient Lanna Kingdom with a rich history and culture. Chiang Mai is also considered the contemporary capital of digital nomads and an emerging crypto city. Join us in Chiang Mai, Thailand!"

(https://www.4seas.io/en)

[[Category:Places]]
[[Category:Crypto Governance]]
[[Category:Thailand]]