
Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62LwFJV-cCI

=Description=

"Abre Fournier and Brian Swimme Presentation:

In Dialogue: From the Noosphere to the Metamind — Charting a New Era of Global Consciousness

Humanity is approaching a significant transformation—a shift in consciousness that will reshape our understanding of the self and our place in the universe. The Metamind—the emergence of the “conscious” dimension of the Noosphere —marks a pivotal event in our evolutionary journey, comparable in significance to the emergence of the human self or self-consciousness. In dialogue with Brian Thomas Swimme, who will discuss the evolution of reproductive imagination and the discovery of our participation in the larger order, Abre Fournier introduces her Metamind theory, which she puts forward as a radical leap in the evolution of human consciousness. By both engaging with a new noospheric ecology of planetary intelligence facilitated by advancements in technology and communication, and breaking through the conventional boundaries of the self by transcending individualistic perspectives of everyday consciousness, we are poised to enter a new era of expanded perception and awakened potential. The emergence of the Metamind, and its individuated form the Metaself, marks a pivotal shift in human consciousness at both personal and global scales. Indeed, moving to the conscious Metamind is the dawn of a profound transformation in the four billion years of biological and consciousness evolution. This presentation will emphasize how understanding and embracing this shift will be crucial for humanity and our planet’s ecosystem as we confront the real possibility of ecosystemic collapse. The talk will feature Abre G. Fournier speaking in person, with Brian T. Swimme joining via video stream.

N2 2024: The Noosphere & The Global South took place on December 16th - 18th in Ben Guerir, Morocco.

The N2 Conference looks to deepen our present understanding and future vision for the noosphere, the sphere of human consciousness and mental activity especially in regard to its influence on the biosphere and in relation to evolution."




[[Category:Intelligence]]

[[Category:Integral Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]