=Discussion=

Otto Scharmer:

"With the beginning of this millennium we have entered a phase
of increased tension between two principal forces. On the one
hand, we see a dramatic acceleration of the forces of fundamentalism, manipulation, and absencing or destruction. On the other hand,
we witness the deepening of a profound opening process around the world
in which groups of people are beginning to become aware of and connect
with the deeper meaning of their life journeys. Day by day, week by week,
both of these forces seem to amplify at the same time. The difference
between them is that the first one—the forces of fundamentalism, manipulation, and absencing—works by decreasing the degrees of freedoms for the
people involved. We see this happening, for instance, when bombs are
dropped with the intention of blowing people into a future that looks more
like a caricature of the past.

By contrast, the other set of forces at work increase the degrees of freedom
by giving people additional ways to attend and respond to their own situations and circumstances. The difference, simply put, is that the first one
looks at a human being as an object that is determined by its environment
and conditioned by its past. As a consequence, it can be influenced, manipulated, and controlled through exterior mechanisms such as algorithms that
keep us firmly in the grip of our habitual bubble. The second view sees
human beings as evolving selves—carriers of a dormant capacity to connect
with a deeper source of creativity and knowing. Through this capacity, people
can link with and realize a future that depends on each of us to bring it into
being. The essence of this view of the human being is to create by connecting
to one’s highest future possibility, one’s authentic Self."
(https://www.ottoscharmer.com/sites/default/files/TU2_epilogue.pdf)


=More information=

* [[Presencing Institute]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Relational]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]