=Text by Brian Davey =

Contribution from [[Brian Davey]] of [[Feasta]], reacting to the [[Berlin Commons Conference]] tension between [[Abundance]] and [[Scarcity]].
subtitles by Franz Nahrada


Brian Davey:

"At the beginning of the final session of the international commons
conference participants were invited to express their worries,
criticisms and reservations. I stood up and said, roughly, the
following:

The participants who make up the conference perhaps should have
focused more on what kind of era we are living in. In the conference
there seemed to be two general understandings and the difference
between them had not been brought out enough during the discussion.

'''Commons as lifeboats ....'''

On the one hand there were those for whom the commons were lifeboat
institutions for collective control over vital resources in a world in
crisis, a world in which production is likely to shrink because of
runaway climate change, depleting energy and water and other
resources. To a large degree these were people whose main focus of
attention was on natural commons - the atmosphere and climate; water
and the oceans; land and ecological systems...

'''or as a new mode of production.'''

On the other hand there were those for whom the commons represented an
entirely new mode of peer to peer production, which, when no longer
held back by the constraints imposed by intellectual property
restrictions, had the potential to usher in a world of
'''abundance'''....not only in the provision of free information services
like Wikipedia, created collectively and available to everyone, but
eventually extending into material production processes too - through
open source design of material goods and the spreading of new ideas
for cultivation. In short we stood at the beginning of an age of
abundance....The participants with this view tended to be those
involved in knowledge and cultural commons - eg those involved in
developing software etc.

'''Limits versus abundance'''

After the conference I think these issues are so important that I have
written this follow up paper. Let me start it by observing that the
environmental movement has long been involved in a debate with the
political and economic mainstream that looks like this:

Environmentalists argue that we are actually approaching and
overstepping material limits to growth and the "carrying capacity" of
the planet's ecological systems. Meanwhile the mainstream argues that
we don't need to worry about any such thing because technology and
human ingenuity will see us through - so that growth can continue
indefinitely into the future....

Now I was not aware of anyone in the Berlin Commons conference who was
arguing for continued growth. And everyone I met in this conference
seemed to be aware of climate change and peak oil and gas.
Nevertheless,  the "abundance" argument did seem to me to be, at least
in part, a re-packaged variant of the "human ingenuity can see us
through" position - with the interesting spin on it, that human
ingenuity and creativity would see us through IF the corporate attempt
to enclose and privatise knowledge through intellectual property
(patents, copyright, royalties etc) can be lifted - so that
intellectual creation can occur as a genuine collective process and
anyone and everyone is free to take the ideas, designs, software and
creations of others, to correct them, amend them, adapt them, further
develop them, contribute to them and so on.....without having to pay
through the nose for the privilege.

Now in my view you can take these ideas too far. But before I explain
why I want to explain why I found this viewpoint refreshing and to
isolate a few kernels of truth.

----

40 years ago in my Trotskyite youth I used to attend conferences which
were almost the polar opposite of this one. Participants in these
earlier conferences were concerned to establish and agree upon what
was "the correct analysis", the correct way of interpreting the world
and what should be done about it. The "correct analysis" somehow
always seemed to be what the people you knew closest thought - because
you had worked out the ideas with them and, if you
disagreed.....well....it would be uncomfortable for you to go to all
the meetings and find that you were the odd person saying something
different.).
 
But, of course, other people, often in or from other places, people
who had other relationships, typically worked out a slightly different
view of what was "correct". So that meant that, for them, you were
wrong, and, for you, they were wrong.

The conferences that resulted from this way of relating to "the truth"
were frustrating and unproductive. I remember people remarking, with
frustration, how the other factions didn't budge an inch in their
thinking and, no doubt, seen from their point of view, neither did we.
Difference was a problem - other peoples different viewpoints were
"wrong" while we were always "right".

I cannot say that everyone had the same experience at the
International Commons Conference. At least some people seemed to get
frustrated - but my own experience was mainly one in which the
participants there were at ease with the differences and prepared to
engage with people with a different viewpoint in a relaxed way - and
that was very refreshing.

Indeed when you adopted this relaxed acceptance of difference my
experience was that you tended to find that the people with the
different view were already aware of your viewpoint - they may not
have agreed with it as the best explanation but sometimes they would
accept it as plausible and another possible view.

Indeed I felt as if I was in a discussion in which participants who
had different views, were regarded as useful for testing out one's own
views, useful for seeing a different perspective that one might not
have had before. There was a sense that ideas and viewpoints are not
fixed and right or wrong, but always in development and the differing
ideas of other people were useful in helping one further develop one's
own ideas.

Here, I think, we have an emerging idea of one dimension of
"commoning" in the "knowledge commons" . I suspect it has arisen from
the experience of working things through in group processes of
software design or of cultural production. Here you have an open
mindedness that has arisen from the experience of open source software
design and the group development of ideas - where "bugs" are regarded
as inevitable, where they are ironed out in collective processes,
where someone else can perhaps creatively develop something that one
has done and intellectual creation is an inherently collective
process.

----

So I think that what I was experiencing was indeed a collective "mode
of production" at work - where "commoning", means active participation
in production, jointly with one's peers. And this is non egoistical,
non competitive, and not concerned with grabbing property rights and
personal advantage - which would, after all, slow down and damage the
collective process.

The idea that doing things in this way is much smoother and more
creative I can really accept....up to a point. I can thus also accept,
up to a point, that it is possible to conceive of responses to the
ecological and economic crises, being developed and designed
collectively and then applied to material production. I am aware, for
example, that there are processes involved in designing "eco-cars"
which are open source.

This idea can be extended even further from ideas and designs into
material production. Thus it would  not just be software and cultural
works that might be created without intellectual property in peer to
peer processes but material products made of "stuff" too - vehicles,
furniture, gardens. (Peer to peer here means co-production without an
intermediary or an organisation, like an employer, managing the entire
process and then claiming the group product as its own).

At its most developed this leads to the idea that open source designs
could be taken and used by anyone in local community work places.
These places of "free infrastruture" would operate like resource
centres and be equipped with computer steered machinery that would be
able to create real material products out of the digital designs. (So
called "Fab Labs" - see http://tangiblebit.com/ )

Well....that is where the theory of an intellectual commons goes into
material production..... However, at this point however I think we
need to come back to Earth.  For these are visions of the future that
I find difficult to believe in and I want to explain why.

'''Energy costs'''

The Berlin Commons conference documentation used a terminology about
the "generative logic of the commons" to refer to the way in which
commons can be and are productive. However, as some people pointed
out, even the digital commons are based on a material and energy
guzzling infrastructure - and although there may be well meaning
designers engaged in open source design processes trying to reduce the
energy usage and material throughput in the maintenance of the
internet infrastructure, the digital commons is by no means a free
lunch. Thus, for example,  making a personal computer costs 1800kWh of
energy and thus consumes 11 times its own weight in fossil fuels
before it gets into use...and that's also before we start to take into
account all the other computers and much bigger servers it will need
to be connected to and the energy they all take to run on...

'''Material Limitations'''

But, for me, there are some important issues here that go way beyond
the issues about the energy used to create and run the internet and
its infrastructure. While it is true that a considerable part of the
financial costs of many products arises out of the design process, and
these costs are greater because of intellectual property impositions
and the charging of rent for the intellectual property, nevertheless,
the creativity that is freed up by knowledge commons operating without
intellectual property restraints cannot in and of themselves lift the
limits to growth which have been the core issue for ecological
economists.

So it is from this standpoint that I find it difficult to go all the
way with, for example, Roberto Verzola of the Philippine Greens, who
wrote a paper for the Berlin Conference called "Abundance and the
Generative Logic of the Commons". Yes, I agree with Roberto that the
internet is producing and abundance of "information and knowledge" but
information abundance is not the same as material abundance.

For one thing an abundance of knowledge and information that some
people have,  can remain unknown to, or  ignored, or otherwise
unattended to, by the people and institutions that need and ought to
know about that information and knowledge so that it is actually used.

In fact there is far more information and knowledge in the world than
we can all possibly devote our attention to and a whole set of
institutions exist to draw attention to the agendas of powerful
interests who are operating in unsustainable ways, and to draw
attention away from, to slander and to try to discredit information
and knowledge about things which need urgent action. Thus, for
example, there has been an abundance of information and knowledge for
decades about unsustainable types of economic development and about
sustainable alternatives - but there has also been a political
economic power structure that has felt able to ignore it, and seduce
the greater bulk of the population in rich countries to devote their
attention to consumption, shopping, celebrity life styles, sports, and
diverting entertainment. At the same time there has been a largely
successful campaign to deliberately mislead people about climate
change and other issues. So while there's a lot of information there
is a lot of ignorance too...... ignor - ance that is. This channelling
of mass attention is based on highly sophisticated knowledge of human
psychology - indeed the founder of the modern PR and marketing
industry, Edward Bernays, repeatedly drew attention to his
relationship to Signmund Freud, and his use of concepts that
manipulate the emotional predispositions of masses of people to suit
the power elite (including the bankers and the energy barons).

Secondly even if the abundance of information were to be used
helpfully in the search for solutions to our problems '''this information
abundance could only to a limited degree be converted into an
abundance of material goods''' - or more accurately, it has a limited
potential to mitigate the decline in production that is likely to
arise through energy descent.

Let me be careful to note that Roberto is well aware of peak oil but I
do not fully agree with his point of view when he writes in his paper
that:

'' " The massive bulk of water, carbon, iron, silicon and other minerals on Earth as well as energy from the sun are also wellsprings of abundance." ''

''"The Earth's mineral abundance is non renewable a\nd must be managed differently from renewable solar energy."''

''"As oil production peaks, for instance, cheap abundant oil will come to an end. Peak oil should teach us an unforgettable lesson in abundance management. Those who miss the lesson will go for more coal, nuclear power and agrofuels. Those who get it will shift to clean renewables, energy efficiency and planned "descent". Transition Towns are leading the way."''

''"Solar energy makes possible other abundant energy resources such as water, wind and wood. In 2009, renewables supplied 25% of total world energy capacity, thanks to China's surging interest in biogas, windpower and photovoltaics. Germany, too. Photovoltaics are made from semiconducting silicon, the material base of the digital revolution (Do you recall how expensive LCD projectors were ten years ago?) If photovoltaics follow similar plunging price trends as other digital goods. we can look forward to a Solar Age soon. Hydrogen from water also promises another abundant energy source."''

''"In passing let me cite one more wellspring of abundance: webs of positive human relationships in caring communities, which generate feelings of peace, contentment, love happiness and other psychic rewards which defy quantification"''

(From "Abundance and the Generative logic of the Commons" by Roberto
Verzola, Philippine Greens.Keynote speech for Stream III

Roberto's message seems to be - yes, there will be peak oil and it
will be a problem but it will only be a problem if the wrong energy
technologies are adopted in response. If we embrace energy efficiency,
and renewable energy technologies which are falling rapidly in price,
then there will not be a problem -  there will still be abundance -
and that's not to mention a non measurable abundance of good feelings
from positive human relations. (Quite what Roberto means by the word
"descent" is not clear to me).

'''As an ecological economist I find these ideas disturbing in this kind of conference.''' They seem to contradict 100% the "Limits to Growth" arguments developed originally in the study commissioned by the Club of Rome in the 1970s and subsequently updated and confirmed by study after study.

I can fully accept the possibility of a non measurable abundance of
good feelings arising out of positive human relationships....although
whether that possibility will in any way be actualised depends on our
succeess, or lack of success, in re-developing the commons and
commoning as the basis of human relationships.....'''however the notion of an abundance in material abundance I do not find credible'''. This
wishes away the fact that Planet Earth has a limited ecological
carrying capacity and all the studies show we have already overshot it
considerably.

'''Supporting points'''

Lets go back to basics. First of all how do we explain and measure
what material production does occur? A good way of doing this is to
take the amount of energy that is applied in economic processes,
adjusting the measure of energy for the efficiency with which the
energy is delivered in the transformation of materials and "stuff"
that becomes embodied in products. Then you get a measure of the
amount of "work" done in material production - where the word "work"
is not a reference to human labour, but to the physics of the
application of energy to the transformation and movement of materials
- physical processes that are subject to the laws of thermodynamics.

Thus the amount of material production in the economy is related to
how much energy is applied AND how efficiently it is applied.

In fact, this way of looking at production, and production growth,
does exceedingly well when it is
applied to real data. Two authors Ayres and Warr - used this way of
thinking to study growth in the US economy. Between 1900 and 1975 it
provide an almost perfect explanation for the trend growth of material
production.

See: http://www.iea.org/work/2004/eewp/ayres-paper1.pdf

Now there is still a place in this model for human ingenuity to
improve the efficiency with which energy is delivered to production.
And there is some place for immaterial production which might grow.
But immaterial production has to be embedded and embodied in material
processes and things too - even a hair cut requires, scissors,
premises, a chair, lighting....

And when it comes to producing stuff you cannot keep on increasing the
efficiency of energy delivery to production processes and nor can you
keep on increasing energy inputs either - especially at a point in
history when the concentrated power made possible by burning fossil
fuel energy sources starts to dwindle because of depletion, going over
the peak of oil production, gas peak and coal peak....(not to mention
the  atmospheric use peak which we passed some time ago).

'''The Limitation of Renewable (Energy) Sources'''

But what about renewable energies? Can these not be the basis of
"abundance" - that is the argument of Roberto and I don't agree.

We need to get a grip on the key fact that there is an absolute limit
on the amount of solar and renewable energies available, no matter how
ingenious and cheap we engineer an infrastructure to capture it, and
no matter how good we are as gardeners and permaculture designers to
capture it through plants.

The "generative logic of the commons" has to work with the fact that
the power of raw sunshine at midday on a cloudless day is 1000W per
square metre - but that is 1000 W per m2 of area oriented towards the
sun, not per m2 of land area. To get the power per m2 of land area in
Britain, where I live, we need to compensate for the tilt between the
sun and the land, which reduces the intensity of midday sun to about
60% of its value at the equator. And of course it is not midday all
the time. And of course in Britain, and many other places it is cloudy
a lot of the time. In a typical UK location the sun shines during just
34% of daylight hours.

Globally total incoming solar radiation is 122 Petawatts which is 4
orders of magnitude greater than the total primary energy supply used
by humanity - but given the low density with which it falls across the
whole planet harvesting it for production processes is a costly energy
intensive process. Many of the current ideas for harvesting this solar
energy for human use assume that we can do this through biomass and
plant based photosynthesis. Perhaps indeed permaculture has much to
offer us - but it cannot resolve the fact that in Britain, after cloud
cover and all the other issues there is only 100 watts falling on each
meter of flat ground on average for the plants to harvest. Nor can
human ingenuity and the generatice logic of the commons do much about
the fact that the best plants, for example, in Europe, can only
convert 2% of that solar energy into carbohydrates.

What's more its as well to remember that humans already appropriate
30-40% of Net Primary Production of the planet (biomass) as food,
feed, fiber, and fuel with wood and crop residues supplying 10% of
total global human energy use.  Even a relatively small increase,
pushing human use of biomass up to 50% of the planets biomass
production would undermine and destroy many hugely important
eco-system services. In fact, because of the climate crisis, we need
to be using biomass to capture CO2 out of the atmosphere. The room for
maneovre barely exists, if at all.

Similar things can be said about other renewable energy resources.
Yes, they are part of the future. yes they are part of what is needed.
Yes, ingenuity can increase their efficiency in harvesting energy. But
no they cannot and will not ever be able to provide an "abundance" if,
by abundance we mean material production abundance.

With current human use of energy globally at about 13 Terawatts in
2005 as a measure we need to take in the significance of the fact
that, after solar energy

''"No other renewable energy resource can provide more than 10 TW.
Generous estimates of technically feasible maxima (economically
acceptable rates would be much lower) are less than 10 TW for wind,
less than 5 TW for ocean waves, less than 2 TW for hydroelectricity
and less than 1 TW for geothermal and tidal energy and for ocean
currents. "'' (Vaclav Smil "Energy in Nature and Society. General
Energetics of Complex Systems." MIT Press, 2008, p382-383).

So lets review the argument. Material abundance requires an abundance
of energy to do the physical work of transforming and moving around
matter to turn good ideas and designs into products available to
users. At the moment humanity uses about 13 TW of energy and this
quantity is set to shrink quite dramatically in availability. No
matter how clever we are the amount that we can replace from
renewables is also strictly limited ....'''a renewable energy infrastructure will take considerable energy to construct and will have to concentrate natural energy fluxes dispersed over wide geographical areas.''' Moreover these natural energy fluxes are
themselves subject to absolute limits in their availability.

'''Conclusion'''

My conclusion is that, to talk about abundance is a very misleading
message. Commons have much to offer us - sharing ideas without
intellectual property constraints will help us, sharing scarce
production and energy and pooling production arrangement and
infrastructures will too, sharing may bring us into human
relationships with many psychological and emotional rewards. In that
sense we may describe commons as "having a generative logic" - But an
"abundance"  is not a message that I agree with - if it taken to mean,
or implied to mean, an abundance of material production. In my opinion
to use the word "abundance" is a misleading picture of the future that
we are heading into.

An abundance of information about how we might make things is not the
same as an abundance of things - it is an abundance of recipes not an
abundance of food."

=Discussion=

==Michel Bauwens: How Immaterial Abundance can assist a Steady State Economy==

'''Response to Brian Davey of Feasta: Immaterial vs. Material Abundance'''

Michel Bauwens:

Brian Davey has written a very stimulating text above, published also [http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/brian-davey-beware-of-fake-abundance/2010/11/13 here], which warns of equating the abundance of immaterial culture with the abundance of material production.

This is a very important argument, with which we basically agree. Nevertheless, I also believe that Brian Davey fails to see the importance of immaterial abundance in solving the crisis of material scarcity.

Let’s quickly review the points with whom I can easily agree.

Yes, we cannot naively hope for the era of material abundance to continue unabated, without recognizing the real material scarcities that are becoming more serious by the day. A serious contraction from the industrial standard of material production is more than likely.

Yes, internet infrastructure is itself a costly material infrastructure.

Yes, we cannot naively assume that ‘abundant’ renewable energy can fully replace, or even substantially replace, the overflow of fossil fuels we got accustomed to. Renewables are not magical solutions and have both absolute limits and real concrete issues of concentration for human need.

So, in conclusion, I agree that it is very dangerous to conflate ‘immaterial abundance’ with material abundance. And this in fact an argument I have been constantly making in my own lecture. That the present system combines pseudo-abundance, a mistaken faith in the infinite abundance of the material world, believing that infinite growth is compatible with a finite planet; with a belief in the necessity of artificial scarcity in the world of immaterial innovation and culture, making it very difficult for humans to freely share and cooperate. I have argued that what I call the successor civilization, centered around the commons and peer to peer dynamics, which subsume both market and state, will overturn that erroneous operating system, into one ''which recognizes both the real scarcity of the material world, and the abundance of cultural exchange in a digital context''. 

My key point would be that a successful transition towards a steady state economy, or even de-growth, actually depends on global cooperation and the available network structure.


A few obvious points. 

-	The internet is a key tool of human cooperation and fast-paced innovation. Humanity will face many challenges, and while local situations are diverse, there are also substantial commonalities, which means that humans can and should learn from each other. That learning, where any potential innovation is instantly available to the rest of humanity, is what the promise of free culture (a misnomer, in the sense that it means the very broad cooperation of humans around a range of issues). Of course, stated in this particular way, there is an exaggerated optimism. Nevertheless, think of how knowledge would be transmitted without the internet, without print, and without writing even. As we face global challenges, many of which will have an urgency, do we have an alternative? Can we afford not to mobilize transnational collective intelligence? Can we afford that localities remain totally isolated? It is not necessary to worship speed, in order to understand that it does have a certain role to play and that isolation through high transaction, communication, and coordination costs, would not be a good thing in then context of urgent problem solving.

-	Global open knowledge, code and design communities follow a different logic than capitalist firms. While capitalist innovation designs for large capital intakes (to weed out competition), for centralized production and international value chains, for consumption through planned obsolescence; open design communities design for distributed manufacturing (not just fablabs, but a general re-orientation of production around appropriate technology using open and distributed manufacturing); without planned obsolescence

-	Internet is a tool for peer to peer and non-hierarchical socialization. Brian remarks how different the Berlin Commons Conference was, in its open dialogue and tolerance for diversity of opinion, from the old leftist battle for truth he was accustomed to in his youth. But there is a reason for this, namely that the process of socialization amongst peers, in a context of cultural abundance, trains for this kind of cooperation

-	Sharing infrastructures,  access to common resources, such as say transportation, only work with ubiquitous knowledge sharing at low coordination costs. For example, bike-sharing systematically failed before the advent of digital media, but are now pretty much routine in many cities. There are huge possibilities for building down the need for material production (for individual property), through sharing infrastructures which depend on the internet infrastructure.

-	Isolated local communities are dwarfish forms, which, even if they are ecologically lighter, would face the pressure of transnational corporations and competitive nation-states. This is a guarantee for social strife, i.e. possibly violent confrontation over scarce resources. On the other hand, local production that is coupled with open design communities and global knowledge sharing, can easily outcooperate the coordination capabilities of transnational companies, while transnational phyles, i.e. coordinated value networks that are responsible for their own livelihoods, can offer fraternity and solidarity in an era of declining welfare states. Global ‘digitally-enabled’ cooperation opens the possibilities for new global governance networks that can tackle global challenges, in ways that neither local communities or nation-states can.


So, the conclusion is: immaterial abundance is not opposed to sustainable material economies, but a condition for a smoother transition towards such a state of affairs. While we have to acknowledge that such infrastructure is costly, and may not survive a ecological meltdown, it is not something to wish for, but something that should be avoided if possible. Amongst the investment choices of humanity, the possibility of global cooperation and mobilizing transnational collective intelligence, should not be discounted, but would be one of the better choices. This of course doesn’t mean that computing itself could not become a whole deal greener than it is now. It is hard to imagine how a steady-state, degrowth, or cradle to cradle economy could be achieved without blood and tears, without the use of collective intelligence.

The crux of the matter is this: we are undoubtedly facing an end to material abundance through fossil fuels. But this transformation can happen the hard way, i.e. as a terrible and costly reduction leading to new kinds of pathological neotribalism and neofeudalism.  This is likely the path if we choose isolated localism, without access to global mutual coordination that is now achievable. It is no use having local organic farming, if one is faced with roving bands of armed men demanding your production .. Or, our society can transform to a higher level of complexity, by achieving a synthesis between a steady state economy, and a very rich global social and cultural life of global mutual coordination on a planetary scale, and a rich relocalized production setting.

The peer to peer vision at least, if achievable, promises this new synthesis, a marriage of the local material and the global immaterial, instead of a return to regressive localism in a context of civil, corporate, and nation-state based strife for scarce material resources.

==Franz Nahrada: What are the Conditions of Abundance ?==

There are a few more points to make. The traditional "ecological" argumentation as used by the Club of Rome usually simply aggregates quantitative aspects of production processes and reproductive capabilities without looking at the interplay between them, which is to say it moderately ill-coordinated and designed under current economic conditions. 

Michael Braungart has put this into a simple image: when you have badly-designed material production that produces waste, each additional activity in this material production will increase the overall scarcity at the end. But if products are designed themselves to be parts of cascades of material re-use and up-cycling, each additional activity increases the base for other activities and creates abundance. 

There is a qualitative factor that determines the interplay between our growing information and the material world: it is the ability to conceive and design self-feeding and self supporting cycles and arrangements where human efforts are not lost when they are once spent, but permanently harvesting systemic gains from these inputs.

The capitalist - industrial mode of production was centered around a monodimensional concept of value, which results in an input - output machine of so-called efficiency. McLuhan once remarked that for this machine it does not matter if its output is cornflakes or cadillacs, as long as the result can be harvested as money. The post-industrial automated mode of prodcution - reproduction will require us to finally create economic measurements and measures that reflect the assumption that the value of each process is multidimensional. 

It is , for example, by no means unimportant where a production process takes place. If the excessive heat of a large server farm that is necessary to maintain our internet infrastructure is used to warm a human settlement, there is a systemic gain merely from design. Everything then is decided by space, time and the interrelatedness of things. This requires a quantum leap in intelligence and information, its by no ways easy to achieve. We must study possible patterns and learn about their complex interplay as essential condition for decisions.

It would be worthwhile to analyze our current society as a constant producer of waste, both imnediate and systemic waste. The answer cannot easily be given, but it is not in the numbers, but in the interplay of things. Nature is a great system of abundance (much more than "steady state"), and that equals to zero waste. We have to learn from her and participate in her cycles, refine them, indulge in them instead of refraining from activities. Thats the important turnauround that we can define and achieve together.


==Wolfgang Hoeschele: Economics of Abundance==

	In his discussion piece, Brian Davey expresses his concern about serious impending resource scarcities (which I share), and his opinion that people who talk about “abundance” are not taking resource scarcity seriously, and are thus overly optimistic about the future of the world.  He further assumes that most of these people come from the “knowledge and cultural commons” backgrounds, and sees this background as part of the reason for their excessive optimism.

	While I cannot talk for everybody promoting ideas about abundance, I can certainly talk for myself, since I have written a book about the “Economics of Abundance.” Brian Davey surely has not had a chance to read that book yet, since it has only just been published and he was probably not aware of its existence before the International Commons Conference. In this forum, I’d like to summarize some of the ideas that I advance in this book, '''to show that promoting an “economics of abundance” is something very different from ignoring resource scarcities''', does not imply excessive optimism, and does not require a background in the information industry (to which I do not belong; I am a geographer accustomed to dealing with very “down to earth” issues of resource use).

'''The Production of Scarcity'''

	First, I would like to emphasize that material resources can be abundant, even though they exist in finite quantity. Material resources are abundant if they are used in non-depleting or non-degrading ways (e.g., breathing air), or if there is much more of them than are needed by people (e.g., fisheries in places where people fish only a small portion of the sustainable yield).

	A fundamental problem about our present economy is that it sees no value in abundant resources because you cannot sell them at a high profit margin, e.g., you cannot package air for breathing and then sell it to somebody; where fish are abundant you can sell them but only at a modest price. In other words, only exchange value is recognized, use value is not. It is therefore advantageous for entrepreneurs to make abundant resources scarce so that they can then be sold at a higher price and generate more exchange value. The argument I make in my book is that the work of making abundant resources scarce is not left to individual initiative but is done by scarcity-generating institutions. Scarcity can be produced by manipulating either the supply or demand of a commodity such that demand exceeds supply. In this sense, there is scarcity even when there is a huge amount of production.  One can also put it this way: our current economy maximizes inefficiency of consumption in order to generate the demand needed to justify ever increasing production. In such a context, increased efficiency of production does nothing to address issues of resource scarcity.

	A good example pertains to transportation. Mobility – the ability to go where one needs to go – is most abundant if all or most people can reach their daily destinations by walking or cycling or public transport. In this way, mobility is affordable to everybody, and is available to young kids (as soon as they can move about independently), to old people (who can use public transport if they can no longer walk, cycle, or drive), to all members of one-car households, and to people with disabilities that prevent them from driving or walking or cycling (who can still use public transport). In these conditions of abundance, it would be possible for most people not to own their own car but to rely on car-sharing or taxi services for the comparatively rare times that they need a motor vehicle. The conditions that support abundant mobility – compact cities with streets amenable to walking and cycling and socializing – also support lower per capita investment in infrastructure, and on the whole lesser resource use than sprawled cities designed for automobile dependence. Hence, “abundance” does not consist of everybody having a car, but of everybody being able to move around freely and at low cost, without depending on complex and unsustainable commodity chains, while “scarcity” consists of everybody wanting or needing a car, no matter whether they can afford one or not.

	The fact that so many cities do not support abundant mobility is a result of the concerted efforts of the car industry, the oil industry, real estate interests, and various associated economic sectors, which have together influenced governments to build or rebuild cities and transport infrastructures to serve the “needs” of cars (note that inanimate objects do not have needs). I have found that talking about how these institutions generate scarcity and alternatives create abundance helps generate great enthusiasm and creativity in working for change, as in a workshop that I recently led (see http://shareable.net/blog/abundant-mobility-one-towns-resources). 

	Scarcity is also generated by inequitable property regimes. For example, if a few people (capitalists, landed gentry, and the like) own the means of production, whether these consist of land, water, access to fisheries or hunting grounds, factories, or anything else, while others are constrained to sell their labor in order to obtain an income, then the property owners have an interest in keeping jobs scarce, to maintain a reserve army of unemployed labor that keeps wages low. We all know this from Marx, this is nothing new. 

In addition, there are important “means of production” that have traditionally been owned by nobody, and it is of advantage to industrialists to use those as free goods of nature and to pollute or otherwise degrade them. Among these are clean air and water; polluting them creates scarcity among all the people whose health is adversely affected. Then, great investments are required to clean up air and water, to the benefit of those industrialists manufacturing the necessary equipment. Common ownership of natural resources (natural resource commons) as well as of workplaces (worker cooperatives) and knowledge (knowledge commons) is essential to undermining this mode of scarcity generation, and to create abundance instead.

	On the level of individual psychology, scarcity is a result of never knowing when enough is enough, of always wanting more. This addictive mindset is fostered by a consumerist culture and insecurity and fear about the future; overcoming such addiction requires precisely the “positive human relationships in caring communities, which generate feelings of peace, contentment, love happiness and other psychic rewards which defy quantification” that Roberto Verzola mentions in his piece.

	An economics of abundance is not an economics that assumes that abundance necessarily exists, but one that analyzes modes of scarcity generation such as the ones I mentioned above, and that points out ways to counteract them. Just as scarcity is socially constructed (and is very real, just as real as a humanly constructed building), so also abundance has to be created.  Under current circumstances, this is a daunting task; whether we will succeed in accomplishing it before we face ecological catastrophe I do not know. However, I feel strongly that the idea of generating abundance points out the kind of path we must take if we are to have any hope of averting disaster. Thus, the value of my proposals does not depend on optimism or pessimism, it depends on whether they are a realistic path out of our current quandary.



[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Energy]]