'''Abundance: The Future Is Better Than You Think. Peter H. Diamandis. Free Press. 2012.'''

== Overview ==
We will soon be able to meet and exceed the basic needs of every man, woman and child on the planet. Abundance for all is within our grasp. This bold, contrarian view, backed up by exhaustive research, introduces our near-term future, where exponentially growing technologies and three other powerful forces are conspiring to better the lives of billions. An antidote to pessimism by tech entrepreneur turned philanthropist, Peter H. Diamandis and award-winning science writer Steven Kotler. 

Since the dawn of humanity, a privileged few have lived in stark contrast to the hardscrabble majority. Conventional wisdom says this gap cannot be closed. But it is closing—fast. The authors document how four forces—exponential technologies, the DIY innovator, the Technophilanthropist, and the Rising Billion—are conspiring to solve our biggest problems. Abundance establishes hard targets for change and lays out a strategic roadmap for governments, industry and entrepreneurs, giving us plenty of reason for optimism.

Examining human need by category—water, food, energy, healthcare, education, freedom—Diamandis and Kotler introduce dozens of innovators making great strides in each area: Larry Page, Steven Hawking, Dean Kamen, Daniel Kahneman, Elon Musk, Bill Joy, Stewart Brand, Jeff Skoll, Ray Kurzweil, Ratan Tata, Craig Venter, among many, many others. 

== About the Authors ==
  <b>Peter H. Diamandis&nbsp;</b>is the Chairman and CEO of the X PRIZE Foundation, co-founder and Chairman of Singularity University and the founder of more than a dozen high tech companies. Diamandis has degrees in molecular genetics and aerospace engineering from MIT, and an M.D. from Harvard Medical School.<p><b>Steven Kotler&nbsp;</b>is an author and journalist. His books include&nbsp;<i>A Small Furry Prayer</i>, <i>West of Jesus</i>,&nbsp;and&nbsp;<i>The Angle Quickest for Flight</i>. His articles have appeared in more than sixty publications, including&nbsp;<i>The&nbsp;New York Times Magazine</i>,&nbsp;<i>Wired</i>,&nbsp;<i>Discover</i>, <i>GQ</i>, and <i>National Geographic</i>. He also writes a regular blog for PsychologyToday.com.
  
  </p>

[[Category:Books]]