

=Description=

Marco Berlinguer:

"This is a loose coalition of civil
society organisations, scientists, educators and governments,
mainly of the global South. Again, the converging focus is the
struggle against the way intellectual property rights are being
deployed to limit access to knowledge-embedded goods, including
drugs, education and science. These struggles are based on
principles of global justice; but increasingly voices are raised
contesting the rationality of these policies from the perspective of
economic efficiency and development."


=History=

Marco Berlinguer:

"An important struggle for the A2K movement was over access
to anti-retroviral drugs during the 1990s, when a new class of
drugs to fight HIV/AIDS had become available but was sold in
developing countries at prohibitively high prices. When, in 1998,
the South African government amended its laws to facilitate the
import of generic versions of the drugs costing 10 times less,
it was sued by 39 of the largest pharmaceutical manufacturers,
supported by US and EU governments The successful outcome
of the struggle to defend the generic drugs in 2001 led other
developing countries to pass similar legislation and to become
increasingly vocal.

A second success was around access to scientific publishing.

In this case, it emerged in reaction to the continuous and
unjustified increase over the past two decades in the prices of
commercial scientific journals, which created unbearable barriers
for universities, public libraries and scientists, and not only in
poorer countries. Such a situation also clashed with the tradition
of freely sharing scientific works. The movement against the
price hikes coalesced around the creation of open access journals
(OAJ)18, which are having a major impact on the market of
scientific journals, not least because they seem better to reflect
the logic of scientific publishing. Numerous other open access
initiatives are also spreading in education, school textbooks and
university courses, effectively combining the pursuit of principles
of social justice with the conviction that sharing is the best policy
to knowledge improvement and development.

The A2K arguments have even reached the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which has
undertaken a scrutiny of the way that the pervasive policies
of patenting are damaging for technological and scientific
innovation, cooperation and advancement – ‘the tragedy of the
anti-commons’."
(draft for Red Pepper)


[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:IP]]

[[Category:Culture]]

[[Category:Encyclopedia]]

[[Category:Education]]

[[Category:Open]]

[[Category:Open Intelligence]]

[[Category:Open Governance]]