
=Discussion=

Dianna Pfeiffer:

'''1.'''

"The driving concept behind the creation of Fab Labs
was to provide ordinary people access to a small
scale workshop with a number of flexible digital
fabrication and computing tools in order to explore
“the implications and applications of personal
fabrication...” (Gershenfeld 11)
Initiated by Neil Gershenfeld, director of the Center
for Bits and Atoms at MIT, Fab Labs are neither run
nor maintained by MIT (all except for the Mobile
Fab Lab), rather the idea for their setup, and in part
the means for enabling supporting partnerships is
the core of MIT’s involvement with Fab Labs today.
As of this writing, there are approximately 34 Fab
Labs globally, a number of which are located in
developing countries.

These small-scale workshops are organized on a
charter system, where one of the key factors in their
success is their method for creating and distributing
collectivized knowledge for making. Gershenfeld
described this as also being a component of his MIT
course ‘How to Make (Almost) Anything.’ In effect,
necessary information is pulled in by the student
as needed, rather than pushed from the instructor.
The Fab Lab charter refers to this as: “you can use
the Fab Lab to make almost anything (that doesn’t
hurt anyone); you must learn to do it yourself, and
you must share use of the lab with other uses and
users. Training in the Fab Lab is based on doing
projects and learning from peers; you’re expected
to contribute to documentation and instruction.”


The basic Fab Lab setup usually includes a laser
cutter, a sign cutter, a small, precision CNC milling
machine, sometimes a larger CNC router, and
always the tools for programming processors and
micro-controllers. Some of the first Fab Labs around
2002 were put together with tools costing a total
of between $20,000 and $50,000. The Center for a
Stateless Society has put the cost of outfitting a Fab
Lab using open-source tools such as the Fab@Home
3D printer, between $2,000 and $5,000 total.

Other tools a Fab Lab might include,
and which significantly increase its cost, are a 3D
scanner, 3D printer, plasma cutter, water jet cutter,
and CNC lathe or multi-machine.

When Gershenfeld was actively engaged developing
the early Fab Labs, he described how he looked at
what the Fab Labs were doing:
Possession of the means for industrial
production has long been the dividing
line between workers and owners. But
if those means are easily acquired, and
designs freely shared, then hardware is
likely to follow the evolution of software.

Like its software counterpart, opensource
hardware is starting with simple
fabrication functions, while nipping at
the heels of complacent companies that
don’t believe that personal fabrication
‘toys’ can do the work of ‘real’ machines.
That boundary will recede until today’s
marketplace evolves into a continuum
from creators to consumers, servicing
markets from one to one billion.


It is this continuum of producers coupled with
varied means of distribution that will likely
influence the role of designers in the future by
offering new avenues for their evolving practice.
As Gershenfeld has helped to establish with Fab
Labs, in order for this change to occur, these tools
not only need to be accessible to a wide range of
individuals, but in a manner in which they may
play, experiment and explore without immediate
commercial constraints on their activities."
(http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-12152009-131820/unrestricted/Pfeiffer_DV_T_2009.pdf)


=Discussion=


Dianna Pfeiffer:

"After reviewing numerous projects that involve
digital fabrication of the last few years, two principal
aspects of their success became apparent. These
are the access to tools, and the communication
of information. Each of the projects highlighted
in the prior sections revolve around both access
and communication to a greater or lesser extent,
and it can be said that it is only in the detail of
organization of these aspects, that the projects truly
differ.


Access and communication can also be conceived
as variants of the traditional dimensions of capital,
namely production and distribution. With one
main difference - in these digital fabrication
projects distribution is not necessarily of a finished
physical product, but is rather the information for
its production. This allows distribution to occur
either before or after production. Consequently,
production as seen in the previous sections, can
occur through increasingly decentralized means,
whether online service bureaus, local production
facilities, or a network of like-minded participants.
Since the product is not a fixed entity, but the
data that defines it, it can also be modified and
manipulated with relative ease. The result, I believe,
is distributed making becoming ever more possible
as the access to tools in turn pulls the information
for making to itself.

Peripheral projects show experimentation with
how individual and customized methods may
work toward a larger system or holistic role of
design. Current smaller projects show the variety
of innovation just beginning to emerge online and
in local communities in the form of local design
and production shops such as Unto This Last and
100K Garages. These act along with the distributed
niche or long-tail services enabled by digital
communications that bring networked business
to small producers on a global scale not unlike
Nervous System and Grossman. This, in addition
to the rise of grass-roots economics in the form of
customized marketplaces similar to those provided
by Shapeways, have much to offer peripheral
producers in future incarnations of distributed
making through their connection to niche markets.
Modification of Software Tools
Extrapolating from examples like Nervous System
and Karsten Schmidt, the ability to individually
configure software toward a desired output will
likely be a continued mode of design investigation,
as software is one of the primary tools used in
design. Today, it is algorithms for modeling form
that designers are configuring, which suggests that
software manipulations in the future may extend
much further into the process of design and the
tools used for fabrication. Moreover, there are early
examples of creative CAM software that show this.
More importantly, however, it is the ease and the
extent to which the designer can reach down in and
truly manipulate the software as a medium that will
affect the degree to which they will be able to create
with it.


==Craft Production and Cottage Industries==

In their much discussed book, The Second Industrial
Divide, Michael Piore and Charles Sabel argue
that... craft production, the suppressed alternative
to mass production... is once more showing itself
to be a real possibility. Its return in more propitious
circumstances could mean not just economic but
social and political gains. 

It could be said that on the scale of cottage industries,
craft production and individual use,
the digital tool is much more readily subverted
to the needs and the desires of the individual
than anything the traditional industries of mass-production
are capable of producing. Where now
in the early twenty first century, unlike the 1980s
when Piore and Sabel wrote, the technical, if
not the economic circumstances, are much more
promising for a return of craft production. It is
not so difficult to see the rapidly multiplying use
of digital fabrication in small scale projects as the
beginning of a shift away from the centralization of
production, and instead toward the development of
varied means of developing and producing material
goods.

With digital fabrication tools, tooling requirements
for differing products can be minimized, if not
eliminated. Where mass-production is not the
aim, but rather customized, design-build, or craft
production is, then the ability for designers to
produce context-specific physical objects is greatly
enhanced with access to these tools. This points
toward a return for some to craft-based design and
making on a local scale, but one with a potentially
global reach. This is not unlike UTL, that produces
locally designed and fabricated furniture. It
also means greater access for others too, where
customized products are much closer, more easily
understood and appropriately configured for each
individual when access to the producer is made
available.


==Accessible Tools & Collaborative Work==

Where designers and makers currently access digital
fabrication tools is piecemeal and limited. To some
extent, this is driving the development of homebrew
CNC and solid freeform fabrication tools along
with the growth of community groups and
community workspaces that include digital tools. It
is probable these will continue to grow in popularity
until the tool cost comes down, and independent
fabricators are better able to produce for, and with
their local communities.

Access to digital tools, especially direct and handson
access is a crucial aspect for designers, and others
to realize its potential. When access to CNC tools is
less focused on the bottom line, innovative projects
often result. These frequently rely on negotiated
relationships between manufacturers and designers,
or community organizations and schools. On larger
scales, they include projects such as the proliferation
of Fab Labs and 100k Garages, which aim to bring
individuals together with tools in an on-going
fashion. While small-scale collaborations arise for
specific projects like that between Karsten Schmidt
and ThingLab UK.

Traditionally, this kind of individual collaboration
between designer and fabricator are common.
With a shift to digitalization for both specifying
and fabricating, design seems to be naturally
including physical production as well. If the
example of desktop publishing suggests anything
concrete about the production of objects, it is that
digitalization offers greater control over physical
production for designers. Thus the designer-asproducer
will plausibly become more common
as digital tools facilitate the making of objects,
and designers are more readily able to physically
produce their ideas. How skilled fabricators might
be impacted by such a scenario, remains to be seen,
but for now, it appears to favor greater collaboration
between skilled fabrication trades and designers.
Through the research undertaken for this paper,
peripheral projects are apt to spin-off additional
commercial projects and non-commercial projects
in similar frequency. Making or designing at this
level is thus self-propagating to a degree, potentially
self-supporting, and as discussed above, often
collaborative.


==Distribution of Design as Media and Culture==

The digitization of design places an emphasis on
two-way communication for the distribution of
design intent and the products of design. In this
sense, digital design data is conceived as a kind
of media, not unlike music, or video content
capable of being variously packaged and modified
as necessary. Current digital media use for other
types of content indicate a preference for searchable
databases. In the case of design, this takes the form
of downloadable geometries for fabrication, and
algorithms for creating design alternatives within a
set field of constraints. Indeed, these are beginning
to surface at sites such as Shapeways, and exhibition
and conference blogs like Generator.x. In the future,
digital design content would ideally take the form of
readily accessible open-commons content created by
the users, and where the organization and access to
this data is one of many possible services that grow
up and around it.

What can be done with design content, whether for
product innovation, or as an easily accessed source
of information for production and distribution are
possible avenues for designers to explore. Ronen
Kadushin’s Open Design project is an early example.
It involves designed objects for 2D sheet fabrication
with digital tools based on the open-source
philosophy of promoting access to the product’s
source materials.

His work, however, is largely self-contained. Even
though the designs are freely available for download,
the activity around them online is relatively flat. By
providing an incentive to participation on the other
hand - tapping into an already engaged group as
Griffith did with kitesurfing, further energy could
be spurred by the sharing. Kadushin’s existing Open
Design site shares almost exclusively one-way and
it is centered on Kadushin. If instead, it included
an active area for uploads of similar designs, and
user-varied designs also for download, the emphasis
would be less on the designer, and more on the
creation of objects and its innovation centered on
the idea of creating designs for open distribution.


==Modular Design==

As of this writing, open-source design projects
of physical objects are beginning to appear. In
current practice, this is similar to the framework
used in open-source software development, but
for hardware. The methodology often relies on
the creation of modular components that can be
mixed and matched together as users require. These
modules are developed as building blocks for more
complex objects Though the projects described
earlier only hint at the possibility of modular
design, design critics such as Paola Antonelli and
Werner Lippert have noted its likelihood as a future
direction for professional design.

The product as starting point was
yesterday. Tomorrow the consumer will
be the focal point for enhancing value.

The emerging knowledge economy relies
on digital self-determination in real time.
The individual linking of what consumers
want with the solutions offered by the
databases, from music downloads all the
way to personal medication, will shape the
economy of the 21st century.

In future, both designers and their clients
will have to dissociate themselves from the
task of styling isolated products and adopt
a holistic approach to their work. 

A good example of this is Bug Labs, the New
York-based company behind BUG, a modular opensource
hardware development platform. They have
designed and developed components of different
electronic functions as freestanding elements
with both physical and software joints that allow
connection to other BUG hardware components.

Users purchase the low-cost open-source
components and combine them to make their own
programmable electronic devices like GPS triggered
MP3 players, or motion-detecting recording devices.

As MoMA’s leading design curator, Paola Antonelli points out,
Rapid Manufacturing Technology gives
us amazing possibilities for ‘open-source
design.’ In the future, designers will
be able to give their clients a complete
framework for creating their own
products, serving as consultants regarding
form and structure. This has happened in
every medium from desktop publishing,
music, and video, to fashion and user-generated
web content. Really, threed-imensional
products are the last area that
this digital revolution can put into the
hands of the public. 

Within the design of open-source modular product
systems, the more useful a component, the more
likely it is to be absorbed into other products. The
very nature of open-source, however, flies in the face
of traditional corporate product design, where it has
been in the commercial interest of the producer to
discourage crossovers with other products for fear
of losing market share. Yet in an environment of
potentially user-modifiable products, proprietary
may in fact turn out to be a hindrance to the growth
of a producer’s market share."
(http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-12152009-131820/unrestricted/Pfeiffer_DV_T_2009.pdf)


[[Category:Manufacturing]]