

=Description=

By Nikolas Kichler:

According to a report by the nonprofit SPUR, an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) is an
affordable “additional, self-contained dwelling unit located within the same lot as an
existing residential building,” such as do-it-yourself (DIY) “WikiHouses” or “Tiny Houses” in
backyards. As many as 50,000 ADUs are estimated to have been built illegally over the
years. The practice has historically been ignored by the city (of San Francisco) until recently, when they
started removing roughly one hundred per year, partly due to neighbors’ complaints. In
many cases, this has been a cause of hardship for vulnerable families facing eviction."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)


=Discussion=

==Legalization of Accessory Dwelling Units in San Francisco, California, U.S.==

By Nikolas Kichler

"To create a path for the legalization of the existing structures and to support the future
construction of additional ADUs, the city has passed two key ordinances. Ordinance no.
43-14 offers a way for “granting legal status to existing dwelling units constructed without
required permits.” These units will now be covered by the city’s rent-control ordinance.
Ordinance no. 25-14 is a pilot program in District 8 that allows the demolishing and
reconstruction of existing accessory dwellings under certain conditions.
These policies will protect both property owners and renters, while encouraging urban infill
in one of the most competitive housing markets in the United States."
(http://www.shareable.net/sites/default/files/SharingCities_FullBooktoPDF_v2%281%29.pdf)


=More Information=

View the full policies here:

* Ordinance no. 25-14: http://www.sfbos.org/ftp/uploadedfiles/bdsupvrs/ordinances14/o0025-14.pdf

* Ordinance no. 43-14: http://www.sfbos.org/ftp/uploadedfiles/bdsupvrs/ordinances14/o0043-14.pdf

==Source==

* Book: Sharing Cities: Activating the Urban Commons. by Shareable. Shareable, 2017 (info in our wiki via [[Activating the Urban Commons Through Sharing Cities]]

[[Category:Housing]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Sharing Cities Book]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]