'''* Conference Paper / Article: Elements of Antirival Accounting with sNFT. By Tommi M Elo, Jarno Marttila, Sergi Cutillas, et al. International Conference on Computational Science - Prague, Czech Republic
Duration: 3 Jul 2023 → 5 Jul 2023. Notes in Computer Science, Springer, July 2023.'''

URL = https://research.aalto.fi/en/publications/elements-of-antirival-accounting-with-snft


=Context=

Esko Hakanen et al. :

"We enter into a novel territory with the economic system in which we
wish to apply accounting, e.g., in information goods. Such systems and resources
are not rival, as they do not deplete in use and can be multiplied practically indefinitely [6]. Consequently, they do not fit the traditional accounting system, and
money is proving to be an unsuitable unit of account, as repeated shortcomings
of the data markets indicate. This paper addresses this shortcoming by
describing and exploring the concept of antirival accounting through tokenised
efforts of a decentralised open-source community. We ask: how antirival accounting can impact the work of decentralised communities using antirival goods?

Building on previous work, we hypothesise that data markets, in
particular, and society, in general, need an efficient socio-technical accounting
system that supports the underlying antirival goods." 

(https://research.aalto.fi/en/publications/elements-of-antirival-accounting-with-snft)


=Abstract=

"Accounting with anti-rival tokens, i.e., accounting based on
shareable units that gain value with increased use, enables efficient and
effective collective action. However, most currencies are rival tokens which
can naturally represent — and be exchanged to — rival goods, such as
a cup of coffee. Antirival systems of account would be a natural fit for
the economy of antirival goods because the logic of value creation and
accounting would be compatible. It is challenging to find an allocatively
efficient price for antirival goods, such as data, measured in rival units of
account. We present an antirival accounting system based on Distributed
Ledger Technology (DLT), where the fundamental operation is sharing
instead of exchanging and study it with system dynamics models and
simulations. We illustrate our arguments by presenting a system known
as Streamr Awards that defines three tokens of a fundamentally novel
type, shareable non-fungible token (sNFT). We present the functioning
of one of these in the work allocation of a self-directed online community."


=Excerpts=

==[[Shareable Non-Fungible Tokens]]==

Sergi Cutillas, et al. :

"We have chosen to utilise DLTs to model and implement a representation of '''an
antirival accounting unit as a shareable non-fungible token (sNFT).''' An sNFT is
distinguished from a regular rival NFT via its novel fundamental operation, as
they can be shared, not only exchanged, between parties."

(https://research.aalto.fi/en/publications/elements-of-antirival-accounting-with-snft)

=Source=

Full Citation:

* '''Elo, T., Marttila, J., Cutillas, S., & Hakanen, E. (2023). Elements of Antirival Accounting with sNFT.''' In J. Mikyška, C. de Mulatier, V. V. Krzhizhanovskaya, P. M. A. Sloot, M. Paszynski, & J. J. Dongarra (Eds.), Computational Science – ICCS 2023 - 23rd International Conference, Proceedings: 23rd International Conference, Prague, Czech Republic, July 3–5, 2023, Proceedings, Part IV (pp. 256-263). (Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Vol. 14074). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-36021-3_25


=More information=

* '''Research Project: ATARCA: [[Accounting Technologies for Anti-Rival Coordination and Allocation]].''' Wolff, J., Ganoo, A., Treuthardt, C., Shaw, C., Ratonyi, A., Elo, T., Sinha, V., Hakanen, E., Järvihaavisto, U., Eloranta, V., Sood, S., Jumite, R. & Nikander, P. 01/04/2021 → 31/03/2023

URL = https://research.aalto.fi/en/projects/atarca

[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]
[[Category:P2P_Accounting]]
[[Category:Sharing]]
[[Category:Commons_Economics]]
[[Category:Money]]