
=Description=

Kanishka Jayasuriya:

"I would like to point to the growing importance of legitimacy within
regulatory structures, which I have already touched on in relation to the notion of
systemic regulation. At a conceptual level I have developed the notion of the
accountability communities as a framework to understand the constitution of public
authority within transnational regulatory regimes. Accountability communities are
complex, and they are composed of public and/or private organizations endowed with
capacities to perform legislative, monitoring, and compliance activities in specific
functionally based regulatory regimes both within and beyond national boundaries. They
operate through institutional forms such as deliberative forums, markets, or network
mechanisms. Furthermore, by virtue of particular understandings of the discourses of
accountability that bind various actors together, these communities enable the location
and identification of public authority, not to mention the ‘public’ to which account is
given within regulatory regimes (see 2008a; and 2008b). In this way, an accountability
community defines public authority within regulatory regimes and provides the basis on
which new forms of state and market-making are created. These accountability
communities are crucial not only to the transnationalization of the state but also to the
very nature of politics, which they effectively shape."
(http://www.criticalglobalisation.com/Issue3/127_138_INTERVIEW_JAYASURIYA_JCGS3.pdf)


=More Information=

From the author:

---. 2008b. Riding the Accountability Wave: Accountability Communities and New
Modes of Governance. In Ginsburg, T. & Chen, A. (eds.) 2008. Administrative
Law and Governance in Asia: Comparative Perspectives . London: Routledge.

---. 2008c. Retailing Governance? The Rise of Accountability Communities. Asia
Research Centre Policy Briefs , 2. Online. Available at:
http://wwwarc.murdoch.edu.au/wp/pb2.pdf [Accessed on 23 November
2009].


[[Category:Governance]]