
URL = http://www.acorncommunity.org/about/

=Description=

"Acorn Community Farm is an egalitarian community founded in 1993.  We are committed to non-coercive, voluntary associations both within our community as well as within the larger community in which we find ourselves. We are also committed to income-sharing, sustainable living, and creating a vibrant, eclectic culture.

We are members of the Federation of Egalitarian Communities, which means that we hold in common our land, labor, resources, and income, and that we use this for the good of our community as a whole and our members as individuals.  While all members must be enthusiastic about a culture of radical sharing and working with one another, we do not share religious, political, or philosophical beliefs.  We use consensus decision-marking in our weekly meetings in order to make decisions about use of collective money, land, and resources.

Acorn is non-hierarchical.  There are no bosses, owners, investors, managers or supervisors.  Although structured in areas such as membership, we intentionally keep policies to a minimum (we have a policy of very little policy) preferring a calm anarchy to prevail. Of the few policies that are in place, our culture encourages personal responsibility rather than supervision, as well as taking issues on a case-by-case basis keeping in mind that needs of individuals vary.  Our community strives to create a stimulating and enriching social, political and intellectual environment.

Our thriving seed business – Southern Exposure Seed Exchange – is part of an exciting movement and growing network of farmers, gardeners and seed savers dedicated to organic, heritage agriculture and independence from the processed, genetically modified, corporately delivered “food” paradigm."
(http://www.acorncommunity.org/about/)

[[Category:Places]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]