
'''= also called "ABC Napels" and sometimes spelled Acqua Bene Comune. The attemps to 'commonify' the water service in the Italian city of Napels.'''


=Discussion=

Ugo Matei:

"The other front on which the struggle in defense of the commons, especially of the
historical victory of the water referendum, is hot and fierce is in the more technical but
not less political domain of public service management models. Despite the fact that
referendum no. 3 was not admitted by the Constitutional Court (see above), it was
crucial in the struggle for the commons to develop an institutional setting somewhere
that is coherent with their nature. Such a setting must be capable of demonstrating
the possibility of a viable alternative to disprove the mainstream claim that in running
important industrial infrastructures, such as an aqueduct, there is no alternative to the
stock corporation (SPA). Those who do not understand (or do not want to understand)
the epistemological revolution of the commons often maintain that keeping a majority
of its capital in public ownership is more than sufficient to respect the referendum
results. This vision, however, does not go beyond the binary opposition private vs.
public, and de facto reduces the issue of the commons to the need to protect the
public sector from privatization of its ownership. Such a vision fails to distinguish the
commons from public ownership.

The unexpected victory of an outsider, former prosecutor Luigi De Magistris, in
the election for Mayor of Naples just a few weeks before the referendum of June 2011
provided an extraordinary political opportunity for the commons movement to
experiment with a genuinely alternative model of governance of the commons. The
mastermind of this political opportunity was Alberto Lucarelli, a member of the Rodotà
Commission and one of the main architects of the water referendum, whom de
Magistris appointed to the City administration in the new post of Assessor to the
commons. De Magistris also appointed myself, a former vice president of the Rodotà
Commission and drafter of the referendum, to serve on the board of directors of the
municipal water company, ARIN S.p.A., a stock corporation group with around 500
employees and about 200 million Euros of business activity. The mission was to steer
the first transformation of a major stock corporation into a new public legal entity 
capable of shielding the water system from the risks of privatization, and at the same
time to guarantee the degree of direct civic participation that the common’s nature
requires.

It is crucial from the theoretical point of view when engineering new institutions
of the commons to consider direct civic participation as an alternative to traditional
hierarchical public control, which happens when the public authority simply owns the
corporation. This philosophy of equidistance (the same radical distance) of the
commons from the private and from the public is a concept that is very difficult to
grasp, especially by the left, who still tend to believe the myth of the “good
government.” In Naples we started the experiment of a legal form of genuine respect
of the referendum outcome grounded in such a philosophy. After Lucarelli left the local
government to seek a parliamentary seat – unsuccessfully – it was very unclear to me
whether the Naples administration had really understood what we were trying to do. In
fact, constructing a genuine commons institution takes power away from the public.
Any administration seriously committed to the commons has necessarily to engage in
a destituent act, that is, a choice of returning direct power to the people.

Thus, a great deal of patience and research is required, both legally and
politically. With regard to the first point, in order to do the formal transformation, it
was necessary to interpret Italian law in a manner coherent with the referendum
results. This required “forcing” a formal legal structure that includes recently
introduced Civil Code provisions (Art. 2500 cc.) which are privatization-friendly and do
not contemplate the possibility of changing the bylaws of a stock corporation to
transform it into a public entity. It took almost a year of legal discussion, with the
acquisition of many expert declarations on all relevant legal aspects (tax, labor law
issues, welfare issues, issues of EU law, etc.), to persuade a notary to sign the
proposed Board deliberation to transfer ARIN S.p.A. into ABC Naples Azienda Speciale
based upon this interpretation. The turning point was the rendering of decision
199\2012 of the Constitutional Court, which offered the basis for a constitutionally
oriented interpretation of the Civil Code. The Court, after hearings in which Lucarelli
and myself argued against the Italian government and on behalf of the Puglia region,
[30] declared the Berlusconi/Monti attempts to cancel the referendum results (see
above) unconstitutional. That landmark decision declared that the referendum has a
surplus of legitimacy compared to ordinary statute making, so that all relevant Italian
law must be interpreted coherently to it.

On the political ground, resistance had to be overcome within the three
member-Board of Directors where the sitting President, representing a variety of
strong vested interests both at the city and at the national level, opposed the
transformation. Eventually, after his quite dramatic resignation in July 2012, I took
over the Presidency, a new Vice President was nominated, and the formal act of
transformation could finally be entered upon on November 30, 2012. Following this
act, duly recorded by the President of the National Notarial Council, the whole process
was completed with the registration of the new entity at the Naples Chamber of
Commerce on April 22, 2013.

From the formal point of view, this transformation into a public entity is a major
victory. Stocks are easy to sell and especially to mortgage to a bank. Because of their
legal nature they actually transform the water system into a tradable commodity
which is de facto owned by the private sector (banks) also when it is formally in public
hands. No such possibility to sell or to mortgage the capital is open to the public entity
Azienda Speciale so that strictly speaking one can claim that the water in Naples is
now shielded from privatization. Nevertheless, as is becoming clear during these two
plus years since the transformation, this is not enough to claim “mission
accomplished!” in the making of a new institution of the commons.

A commons institution requires a DNA (corporate bylaws) coherent with the
mission of governing the commons in an ecologically sustainable, socially responsible,
long-term philosophy. Of course, this mission can only be accomplished if the entity is
economically and financially well run, which depends not only on the quality of its
management and of its workers, but also on the flexibility, adaptability, and efficacy
granted by its bylaws. Some agency of control deploying some kind of standard must
control the degree of accomplishment of the mission enshrined in the DNA of any
organization. In the case of the stock corporation, whose DNA requires its officers to
pursue profit and shareholder value, the market is such an agency of control. In the
case of an organization belonging to a municipality, whose vocation is to serve the
interest of the administration in office “as if” the administration was carrying on the
activity directly (this is the so called in house providing method), the agency of control
is the political process represented by the elected or appointed officials of the
municipality. The standard which they apply, rather than long-term ecological interest
of future generations, is their possibility of being re-elected, thus the running of the
business very much depends on which political party is in office and what the
politicians are trying to signal to their constituency.

In the case of a commons organization that serves the interests of ecology and
of future generations, neither of these traditional agencies of control is appropriate. In
Naples we have opted for a “Comitato di sorveglianza” [supervisory board], a sort of
multi-stakeholder panel composed of five employees (elected by their peers), five
customers (decided by random selection from those that signal their interest), five
members of the City Council (politicians), and five activists from environmental
movements. Oddly, this latter is the only component that has not yet selected its
representation because of the usual infighting of the left which I do not wish to discuss
here. The idea is that such a multi-stakeholder board can check the way in which the
administrators (appointed by the Mayor) carry out their duty to be faithful to the
generative DNA of ABC.

This institutional solution in Naples is still in a phase of experimentation and
many adjustments are possible. However, direct participation in the running of the
commons can actually happen according to this model if we succeed in making the
supervisory board strong, ecologically literate, and independent. In the future, maybe
many “commons institutions” will take a similar organization form that experiments
with governance which is neither the private corporate structure nor the obsolete
direct political-administrative running of public services. Currently, there is a quite
serious controversy because of an attempt by the municipality to change the bylaws
of ABC incrementing rather than reducing hierarchical bureaucratic controls, and an
attempt by the Campania region (run by the right) in the opposite direction to re-open
an opportunity for privatization.

A lot of experimentation must happen and it is not easy to carry it on in a very
stormy political climate. For example, we can move some interesting steps in the right
direction if the supervisory board at some point runs a “matrix of the commons,” a
sort of balance-sheet of the commons capable to monitor the environmental and
social impact, as suggested by the Gemeinwohl-Ökonomie, in its evaluation of the
management’s performance. On this specific issue, a working group is in place, at the
International University College in Turin.

Also crucial is to work on the correct
division of power between the administrators and the supervisors. All of this can be
experimented on in the future, when and if we are able to make ABC an institution
that is actually emancipated by the intervention of a contingent political majority. This
is not yet the case in practice in Naples, where recently I am experiencing quite some
reluctance on the part of the municipality to actually hand over real power to the new
commons institution. At any rate, ABC is the most advanced publicly owned commons
institution that was possible."
(https://commonsblog.files.wordpress.com/2007/10/mattei-italian-commons-chapter-short.pdf)


[[Category:P2P Law]]

[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:P2P State Approaches]]

[[Category:Policy]]

[[Category:Public Services]]

[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Commons Policy]]