
'''* Book:: Action Leadership: Towards a Participatory Paradigm. Ortrun Zuber-Skerritt. S rin r 2011'''

URL = http://bookshared.com/2011/05/action-leadership-towards-a-participatory-paradigm.html


=Description=

"Action leadership is a creative, innovative, collaborative and self-developed way to lead. It eschews the hierarchical structure usually associated with leadership and is based instead on the democratic values of freedom, equality, inclusion and self-realization. It take responsibility for, not control over, people through networking and orchestrating human energy towards a holistic outcome that benefits the common interest. Action leaders are passionate people who abide by the motto that “Learning does not mean to fill a barrel but rather to ignite a flame” in others. And in this time of rapid economic, political, technological, social and ecological changes, action leadership and action leaders are precisely what’s needed to improve how people and organizations engage constructively to address the myriad complex issues challenging society at all levels.

Action Leadership: Towards a Participatory Paradigm explains and illustrates how action leadership can be developed through participatory action learning and action research (PALAR). It addresses real-life issues by people who choose to work collaboratively towards shared goals while developing their learning, insights, knowledge, people skills and personal relationships through involvement in a PALAR project. The book provides a conceptual framework for action leadership and for the integrative, practical theory of PALAR; and examples of applications in higher education, management education for organization development, and community development. Readers are encouraged to adopt, adapt and further develop the evolving concepts of action leadership and PALAR in a participatory paradigm of learning, research and development."
(http://bookshared.com/2011/05/action-leadership-towards-a-participatory-paradigm.html)






[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Facilitation]]