'''Adam Arvidsson''', '''Developer of the concept of the [[Ethical Economy]]'''

==Bio==

"I direct the [http://www.etnografiadigitale.it Centre for Digital Ethnography], convene the Master in Digital Methods and Digital Culture and teach two courses: Sociology of Globalisation and Nuovi Media e Comunicazione"

(LinkedIn profile, 2019)

"Adam Arvidsson teaches Media Studies at the University of Copenhagen. His main interest lies with the new forms of cooperation enabled by new media and their economic and political potential. He has just published Brands. Meaning and Value in Media Culture (London, Routledge 2006) in which he proposes a theory of the brand as a key institution in the information economy. Adam is a member of the kesera think tank and the actics ethical software company. 

Kesera is a copenhagen-based think tank and incubator. Its mission is to provoke new forms of creative collaboration across disciplinary and professional boundaries. So far Kesera has launched the actics company and  is in the process of launching the consultancy business 'ethicaleconomy.com'

Actics is a start-up company that is in the process of developing ethical community software. Actics will offer  a public online community devoted to discussing ethical questions and coaching ethical performance. It will also offer a number of private corporate solutions to help companies with ethical management and community building." 
(bio from personal email reply after request)

[https://www.che-fare.com/autore/adam-arvidsson/ Bio in Italian] from che-fare.com

==More Information==
* [[Adam Arvidsson on the Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy]]
* [[Valuing the Ethical Economy]]
* [[Capitalism and the Ethical Economy]]
* [[Crisis of Value and the Ethical Economy]]

* [https://www.linkedin.com/in/adam-arvidsson-86490140/ on LinkedIn]
* [https://twitter.com/adamerica70 on Twitter]
* [https://www.amazon.com/Adam-Arvidsson/e/B001HMNEEY Books by him on Amazon.com]
* [https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Adam_Arvidsson2 on ResearchGate]
* [https://vimeo.com/31613109 DOCH Lectures: Adam Arvidsson 3 November 2011]
* listed in the [[Association of Peer to Peer Researchers‎‎]]
* Contact: Email: erica.adam ... gmail.com

[[Category:Research]]
[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:EthicalEconomy]]