
'''= ASTM International defines Additive Manufacturing as the “process of joining materials to make objects from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, as opposed to subtractive manufacturing methodologies'''. (ASTM F2792-10, June 2010)

=Description=

'''1. From the [[Cosmo-Local Reader]]:'''

"ASTM International defines Additive Manufacturing as the “process of joining materials to make objects from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, as opposed to subtractive manufacturing methodologies. (ASTM F2792-10, June 2010)

This entry from acus.org describes the basic process: “The AM process begins with a 3D model of the object, usually created by computer-aided design (CAD) software or a scan of an existing artifact. Specialized software slices this model into cross-sectional layers, creating a computer file that is sent to the AM machine. The AM machine then creates the object by forming each layer via the selective placement (or forming) of material. Think of an inkjet printer that goes back over and over the page, adding layers of material on top of each other until the original works are 3D objects.” (http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/403/101711_ACUS_3DPrinting.PDF 


There are four major methods involved in ‘additive fabrication’, one of which is the now well-known 3D Printing.


The methods are:

#3D Printing Proper
#Fused Deposition Modeling
#Stereolithography
#Selective Laser Sintering


The french author Yannick Rumpala stresses the potential of these new techniques for a new societal reconfiguration: “The potentialities of this type of technology are also linked to the social bases on which it grows. A large part of its development is indeed favoured by collaborations in networks, which allow individuals, again thanks to the Internet, to exchange and share ideas, and compare experiences. It thus has a strong rhizomatic potential, in the way it can spread (thanks to advances in the digital world), but also in the way it can challenge installed hierarchies and subordinations. The change would be possible not by an impetus from economic or political hierarchies, but diffusely, with a technology enabling new practices which, when generalized, could themselves have systemic effects. Thanks to the techniques developed, capacities seem to be given back to communities, like those that have qualified themselves as “makers”. It is possible to imagine that the scope of these transformations can be global. “ This article also stresses the impediments in implementing such a vision: [https://yannickrumpala.wordpress.com/2012/03/01/additive-manufacturing-as-global-redesigning-of-politics/]

Author: Michel Bauwens

([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zGyTxMQMb6WACN9gLBn9DxIOGhLm9QfVy2j8oOWvRfY/edit?tab=t.0])



'''2.'''

"Traditional manufacturing has fueled the industrial revolution
that has enabled our world today, yet it contains inherent
limitations that point to the need for new approaches.

Manufacturing comes from the French word for “made by
hand.” This etymological origin is no longer appropriate to
describe the state of today’s modern manufacturing
technologies, however. Casting, forming, molding, and
machining are complex processes that involve tooling,
machinery, computers, and robots. Similar to a child cutting
a folded piece of paper to create a snowflake, these
technologies are “subtractive” techniques, in which objects
are created through the subtraction of material from a
workpiece. Final products are limited by the capabilities of
the tools used in the manufacturing processes.

By contrast, AM is a group of emerging technologies that
create objects from the bottom-up by adding material one
cross-sectional layer at a time.1 Revisiting the childhood
analogy, this is conceptually similar to creating an object
using building blocks or Legos.

The AM process begins with a 3D model of the object,
usually created by computer-aided design (CAD) software
or a scan of an existing artifact. Specialized software slices
this model into cross-sectional layers, creating a computer
file that is sent to the AM machine. The AM machine then
creates the object by forming each layer via the selective
placement (or forming) of material. Think of an inkjet printer
that goes back over and over the page, adding layers of
material on top of each other until the original works are
3D objects.

There are several AM processes that are differentiated by
the manner in which they create each layer. One technique
known as “Fused Filament Fabrication” 
involves extruding thermoplastic or wax material through
heated nozzles to create a part’s cross sections.2 Filament
feedstock is guided by a roller into a liquefier that is heated
to a temperature above the filament’s melting point. The
material is then able to flow freely through the nozzle. When
the material reaches the substrate, it cools and hardens.
Once the layer is complete, the build platform is lowered
one layer-thickness by the Z-stage and deposition of the
next layer begins. A secondary sacrificial material may also
be deposited (and later removed) in order to support the
construction of overhanging geometries.

Other AM technologies use different techniques for creating
each layer. These range from jetting a binder into a
polymeric powder (3D Printing), using a UV (ultraviolet)
laser to harden a photosensitive polymer
(Stereolithography), to using a laser to selectively melt metal
or polymeric powder (Laser Sintering).Moreover, recent
developments in the synthesis of end-use products allow
for increasing numbers of materials to be used
simultaneously. Think of an inkjet printer with six color
cartridges printing simultaneously—but with different
materials such as various metals, plastics, and ceramics in
each cartridge."
(http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/403/101711_ACUS_3DPrinting.PDF)

=Discussion=


==The Future of Additive Manufacturing==

"Recent reports and developments suggest that AM
development is gaining momentum and could be reaching
a take-off point within the next decade. Hints of the future in
a recent Economist, cover story, “Print me a Stradivarius,”
captured imaginations throughout the policy world.5 A 2010
Ganter report6 identified 3D Printing as transformational
technology in the Technology Trigger phase of the Hype
Cycle7 (i.e., only 5-10 years from mass adoption). 

While those involved in AM research might argue that it instead is
emerging from a “Trough of Disillusionment” towards a
“Slope of Enlightenment,” two recent significant advances
have ignited broad interest in AM:

• Direct Metal AM: Significant improvements in the
direct additive manufacture of metal components
have been made in the past five years. Engineers
are now able to fabricate fully-functional
components from titanium and various steel alloys
featuring material properties that are equivalent to
their traditionally manufactured counterparts. As
these technologies continue to improve, we will
witness greater industrial adoption of AM for the
creation of end use artifacts.

• Desktop-scale 3D Printers: As direct metal AM is
breaking longstanding technology acceptance
barrier related to materials, the recent emergence
of desktop-scale 3D printers is eliminating cost
barriers.8 Thanks to expiring intellectual property
and the open-source (and crowd-source) nature of
these projects, AM technology can now be
purchased for around $1,000. Because of this low
price point, interest in 3D Printing has skyrocketed
as more and more hobbyists are able to interact
with a technology that, in the past, was relegated to
large design and manufacturing firms. This has
democratized manufacturing, thus resembling the
early stages of the Apple I’s impact on
personal computing.

Thus, the 3D printing revolution is occurring at both the high
end and the low end, and converging toward the middle.

One end of the technology spectrum involves expensive
high-powered energy sources and complex scanning
algorithms. The other end is focused on reducing the
complexity and cost of a well-established AM process to
bring the technology to the masses. Major advances will
continue to be made in both directions in the next five
years. “Direct metal” processes will continue to advance as
process control and our understanding of fundamental
metallurgy improves. These cutting-edge technologies will
gain broader acceptance and use in industrial applications
as the necessary design and manufacturing standards
emerge. On the other hand, the quality and complexity of
parts created by the desktop-machines will continue to
improve while the cost declines. These systems will also
see broader dissemination in the next 5 years—first through
school classrooms and then into homes. While these two
technical paths will continue to develop separately—with
seemingly opposing end goals—we can expect to see a
convergence, in the form of a small-scale direct metal 3D
printer, in the next few decades."
(http://www.acus.org/files/publication_pdfs/403/101711_ACUS_3DPrinting.PDF)


=Source=

Report : Could 3D Printing Change the World? [[Technologies, Potential, and Implications of Additive Manufacturing]]. By Thomas Campbell, Christopher Williams, et al. Strategic foresight INITIATIVE. October 2011.



[[Category:Manufacturing]]