

'''Essay: ADVANCING THE CONCEPT OF PUBLIC GOODS. INGE KAUL AND RONALD U. MENDOZA'''

URL = http://www.undp.org/globalpublicgoods/globalization/pdfs/KaulMendoza.pdf


=Excerpt=

From the introduction:

"Recent decades have seen major shifts in what is considered and treated as private
and as public. Economic liberalization, technological advances, and privatization
have allowed markets to expand into new product areas and be integrated across
national borders. In addition, ever-increasing numbers of private corporations
have gone public, floating shares on stock markets.

As a result the public—people in general and shareholders in particular—want
to know much more about companies’ production and marketing principles.
Consumers insist on product labeling. Labor and environmental policies can no
longer be hidden behind boardroom doors. Public norms define expected standards.
And civil society organizations assess and publicize corporate citizenship
(Keane 2001; UNRISD 2000).Moreover, private businesses engage in self-regulation,
in setting norms and standards, and in arbitrating conflicts—functions usually
associated with the state (Cutler, Haufler, and Porter 1999).
Meanwhile, government programs increasingly follow market principles,
outsourcing service delivery to private providers and recovering costs through
user fees and other charges. There are also calls, from businesses and civil society
organizations, for governments to operate more transparently and accountably.
As the growing literature on good governance signals, the public sector often lacks
publicness.

Yet as Edwards and Zadek (in this volume) show, businesses and states are also
shining the spotlight of publicness on civil society organizations—on their representativeness
and legitimacy. The shifts between private and public thus reflect
greater shared concern for the public domain among all the main actors—the
state, businesses, civil society organizations, and households—and for what others
expect of them and how their private activities affect others (figure 1). A wider
arena, and probably a new era, of publicness have emerged."


==On the nature of [[Public Goods]]==

"But what are private goods? And what are public? Economics textbooks
define private goods as those that are rival in consumption and that have excludable
benefits (or costs).3 That is, consumption of a private good by one person or
group diminishes its availability for others—and one person or group can exclude
others from consuming it. Private goods meet the requirement for market transactions.
Their ownership can be transferred or denied conditional on exchange —
that is, paying their price.

Public goods are defined as having the opposite characteristics: as being nonrival
in consumption and having nonexcludable benefits. The market cannot
price these goods efficiently. Accordingly, they are often classified as market failures
and as justified cases for government intervention. Thus the textbook definitions
return to the market-state issue: the provision of private goods is assigned
to the market, and public goods to the state. The public domain appears as a residual
category,with states performing tasks that markets cannot. But as noted,“private”
can no longer simply be equated with markets, and “public”with states. Both
contribute, among others, to the public and private domains.Moreover, the properties
of goods can change from being public to private and from private to public.
This chapter revisits the standard definition of public goods, suggesting that
a distinction be made between these goods’ basic or original properties (such as
being nonrival or nonexcludable) and their actual characteristics—those that
society has assigned to them. For some goods the basic and the actual qualities
may be the same. But for many, perhaps even most, they are not.According to this
expanded definition, public goods are those that are nonexclusive—that is, de
facto public in consumption.

The next section shows how this definition may require reconsidering some
aspects of the theory of public goods. The discussion then turns to global public
goods, the public goods of interest in this volume. The analysis covers the definition
and typology of these goods, the politics of their provision, and the dimensions
of their production—highlighting issues clarified in subsequent chapters.
The discussion shows that to better understand global public goods, it is
important to advance the concept of public goods in general, including that of
national public goods.4 This is especially important because most global public
goods are national public goods that, in the wake of globalization, have gone
global.Viewed from the production side, they can be seen as national public goods
plus international cooperation (see also the chapter on institutions by Kaul and
Le Goulven in this volume). So, understanding global public goods requires
understanding national public goods, and under current conditions the theory of
public goods would be incomplete without a full discussion of global public
goods. This chapter identifies some aspects of the theory of public goods that may
need to be reconsidered and subjected to further study and policy debate.


'''RETHINKING THE DEFINITION OF PUBLIC GOODS'''

Although the literature on public goods is extensive and diverse, there is a standard
definition of public goods anchored on nonrivalry and nonexcludability.

But the properties of goods do not always correspond to this standard definition.
The main reason is that society can modify the (non)rivalry and (non)excludability
of a good’s benefits. Goods often become private or public as a result of
deliberate policy choices. That is why consideration should be given to expanding the definition—to recognize that in many if not most cases, goods exist not
in their original forms but as social constructs, largely determined by policies and
other collective human actions.According to this revised definition, public goods
are nonexclusive or, put differently, de facto public in consumption.


'''Public and private as social constructs'''

The conventional approach to defining private and public goods is to identify a
good’s (non)rival and (non)excludable properties (figure 2), then define the good
as private or public based on those properties. As noted, rival benefits mean that
one person’s consumption of a good diminishes its availability for others. For
example, if one person consumes a glass of milk, it is no longer available for others.
Although the link between rivalry in consumption and excludability of benefits
is not always automatic, the example of the glass of milk shows that by
consuming a rival good, a person can exclude others from its enjoyment. In this
sense milk is both a rival and an excludable good, and so falls into quadrant 1 of
figure 2. It is a private good.

Another example, land, is also both rival and excludable in its original state.
As a result land has been a source of conflict throughout history.Many struggles
over land continue, but many societies have introduced property rights regimes
that regulate land ownership, minimize uncertainty, and reduce the need for constant
vigilance to defend territories against potential claimants. Thus property
rights make excludable goods, such as land, a private good of recognized and reliable
stature. Private goods usually have clear property rights specifying who has
the exclusive right to determine how they can be used, including the ability to
trade them in the market.

Even though land is a rival and excludable good, many traditional societies
maintain open, nonexclusive grazing and hunting grounds. And some communities
still manage as commons such natural resources as land, forests, water, and
plant and animal species (Barzel 1997; Bromley 1990; Demsetz 1967; Ostrom
1990). These approaches reconfirm that excludable resources do not necessarily
have to be made private or exclusive.Doing so is a policy choice, and often a societal
choice to ensure the sustainable use of certain goods.

Compare the standard classifications in figure 2 with those in figure 3, which
groups goods primarily according to their socially constructed status. The main
difference between the two sets of classifications lies in where in terms of “private”
and “public”goods fall when assessed according to their basic properties and their
socially determined status.

Consider the atmosphere. In figure 2 it is in quadrant 4 as a rival, nonexcludable,
open-access good. Figure 3 also lists the atmosphere in quadrant 4, but with
a difference. In quadrant 4B, which is part of the public domain, the atmosphere
is listed in its familiar form, as a common pool resource.But today the atmosphere’s
status is contested. Because of policy debates on global environmental issues, the
atmosphere is increasingly linked to new, humanmade private products—namely,
permits (allowances) for pollution (especially carbon dioxide) emissions.6 Such
permits do not turn the atmosphere into a private good, but they limit some actors’
use of it in a particular way. If an international agreement such as the Kyoto
Protocol were to enter into force (see http://unfccc.int/resource/convkp.html),
what would become a private (national) entitlement is a specific aspect of this
resource: the right to use the atmosphere as a “pollution sink” or, more precisely,
to emit certain types and amounts of gases into it. Limiting its use in this way would
preserve the atmosphere so that all actors could enjoy it more broadly.
Hence the atmosphere appears twice in figure 3: in quadrant 4A because of
national and international arrangements to preserve it and in quadrant 4B
because—clean or not—it is available to be consumed by all people. Other natural
commons,such as lakes, rivers, and various species of wildlife, have also developed
dual status. Hunting permits and fishing quotas are widely used policy
instruments for natural resource management. So are norms and standards limiting
or banning the release of hazardous effluents into public waters. Thus the
earlier finding for originally rival and excludable goods also holds for originally
rival and nonexcludable ones, but in the opposite way: they can be public and
there for all to consume in unlimited measure, but they need not be. (There are
exceptions, however, discussed below.)

Nonrival goods have experienced similar policy-induced shifts. Some scholars
have expanded the standard definition of nonrival goods to include those that
can be made available to additional users at minimal or no cost (Nicholson 1998;
Rosen 1999; Stiglitz 2000). For example, a new chemical formula could be shared
with the concerned professional community simply through an email.

Yet many knowledge elements are made exclusive and private through property
rights. In the form in which society often likes to see them, they fall into quadrant
2A of figure 3—in the private domain, as nonrival but exclusive goods. An
example is manufacturing procedures protected by process patents. Yet scientific
knowledge applied to and embodied in physical products, such as pharmaceuticals,
tends to be subject to reverse engineering and authorized use.8 Judged on its
natural properties, such knowledge is probably more of a nonrival, nonexclusive
good and belongs in quadrant 3 of figure 3.

Society can also choose to make nonrival goods more public (nonexclusive)
by design; see quadrant 2B of figure 3. In some cases it may even be compulsory
to consume such goods. For example, people are usually required to respect
property rights. Similarly, growing policy attention is being paid to encouraging
respect for human rights, including gender equality.9 Most countries still have
some way to go in making respect for human rights fully nonexclusive, ensured
for all groups. Progress on universalizing more technical norms and standards—
weights and measures, common currencies and languages, certain traffic rules—
has been much easier to achieve.

Rival goods can also be kept or made nonexclusive; see quadrant 4B of figure
3. As noted for land, one policy option for doing so is to create a management
regime that maintains broad public access. Public parks and nature reserves are
examples.Another is to make rival goods available in such plentiful quantities that
there need not be any competition over who gets to use them.Many societies have
chosen this policy route for basic education and health services.

This approach is usually taken for two reasons. First, goods such as education
and health are often seen as human rights and as having intrinsic value. Societal
notions of fairness might require that education be made available to all in the
spirit of commodity egalitarianism (Tobin 1970). Second, an educated and
healthy population generates important private and public benefits. Educated
people tend to be more productive and to contribute more to economic growth
and development. Thus many countries have made basic education not just free
and universal but compulsory as well.

If basic education is assessed only in terms of its natural properties, it falls
into quadrant 1. But when judged on its actual form, as in figure 3, it must appear
three times. In quadrant 1 it figures as a private good of educated individuals. In
quadrant 4B it appears as a universally available, nonexclusive service. And in
quadrant 3 it shows up as having added to a country’s overall productivity and
economic growth potential. Two of its dimensions (in quadrants 4B and 3) are in
the public domain. As social institutions evolve, many goods—private and public—
develop into “mixed” cases, displaying both exclusive and nonexclusive
properties.

The goods in quadrant 3 in figures 2 and 3 are technically nonexcludable and
so also exist de facto in nonexclusive form. An example is moonlight.With current
technology, policymakers have no choice but to leave moonlight in quadrant
3. Its nonexcludability—and hence its nonexclusiveness—appears to be an innate
quality.Obviously such goods are not socially determined and so constitute a possible
exception to the notion of mixed or evolving properties.
But goods can change their positions if new technology de
velops. Take television
signals. There was no question of public or private television before it
became possible to scramble television waves and to restrict transmission through
cables.Now some channels can be viewed only for a fee.As a result television falls
partly in the private domain (quadrant 2A in figure 3) and partly in the public
(quadrant 2B).

Returning to quadrant 3, the main goods are policy outcomes or overall conditions
such as peace, law and order, financial stability, efficient markets, and communicable
disease control and eradication. Once these conditions exist, all people
can—and sometimes must—consume them. The goods’ benefits are indivisible,
so they exist for all in the same amount and with the same characteristics.
These goods are often more evident when undersupplied. For example, conflict
is more noticeable than peace, which is often taken for granted. Similarly,people realize that they are “part of the market” much more when a stock market
crashes and the value of their investments tumbles. Or they recognize the close
links between general health conditions when a flu epidemic strikes. The corresponding
public bads are also listed in quadrant 3.

Hence figure 3 illustrates that in most if not all cases, publicness and privateness
are social constructs. It often takes a long time and repeated efforts to anchor
a good firmly in the public domain, as with equity or respect for human rights.
Similarly, it often takes a policy decision to make a good private. And in the follow-
up, it takes an elaborate institutional and organizational framework to define,
assign, and monitor private property rights, update and revise them as needed,
enforce them, and settle disputes.

Societal norms and decisions of what is and is not private and in the realm of
discretion of individual actors often reach deeply into what many perceive as the
private sphere of people’s lives—such as matters of matrimony and inheritance of
private property.Most societies recognize that people should not be abused, even
in the privacy of their homes and not even by their relatives. Children also enjoy
this right, along with broader freedom from violence. On a much broader level,
state borders can no longer be used as shields behind which to curtail human rights,
practice corruption, spew air pollution, or pursue publicly frowned-on policies.
The standard definition of public goods has illuminated many important
issues in the provision of such goods, including free riding and the prisoner’s
dilemma. But that definition does not fully capture the policy approach needed
when dealing with the novel nature of many of these goods.As a result many public
goods are still analyzed in an almost passive manner. Too often it is assumed
that a nonrival and nonexcludable good must be public, or that a rival and excludable
good must be private and is best left to the market.

That approach misses a basic point. Before goods appear in the market or in
the portfolio of state agents, policy choices have been made or norms established
to make the goods private in the sense of being exclusive or public in the sense of
being nonexclusive. And even if these decisions have already been made in the
past, that does not preclude rethinking them in light of new realities. “The public
will operates constantly, not only before and/or after. If it operated ‘before’, that
is tantamount to admitting that it operates afterward and at all times in between”
(Wildavsky 1994, p. 388).

The excludability or nonexcludability of goods often facilitates or hampers
such public policy choices. But it usually does not obviate the need to make them.
In any event, the defining characteristics of many public goods are not inherent
and are often socially endogenous. This issue has been noted in the literature
on public goods (Cornes and Sandler 1994, 1996; Malkin and Wildavsky 1991;
Marmolo 1999;Wildavsky 1994).Yet its recognition has not led to the formulation
of a definition to complement the standard one and help policymakers distinguish
between goods’ original properties of (non)excludability and (non)rivalry and
their de facto status as public or private.


'''Expanding the definition of public goods'''

The challenge is to define public goods in a way that does not leave the task of
identifying “public” and “private” solely to the market but that also involves the
general public and the political process. One way forward would be to develop a
definition that encompasses all the goods in the public domain (see figure 3).
These goods typically fall into three groups: technically nonexcludable, public by
policy design, and inadvertently public.

Technically nonexcludable—and so nonexclusive—goods have already been
discussed. So have goods made or left public by policy design. It is worth adding
that goods in this category can include those commonly perceived as having benefits
(such as communicable disease control) as well as those generally referred to
as public bads (crime, violence, air pollution). Bads left in the public domain may
primarily affect voiceless future generations or politically weak groups, or may be
perceived as being too costly to correct or secondary to other concerns. Uncertainty
about the exact nature of a problem or its solution can also contribute to
bads being left knowingly in the public domain. Such uncertainty is still evoked
in discussions of how to respond to now certain global climate change.
The public domain has often contained for long periods public bads and
goods not recognized as such. These may have become inadvertently public
because of unanticipated or unforeseen circumstances. The first reports on the
thinning of the ozone layer emerged only in the 1970s.11 Even today the public
domain may contain elements that tomorrow’s scientists could recognize as having
negative public effects and that tomorrow’s policymakers might decide to ban
from the public domain.

Bads also show that goods do not only migrate from the public domain into
the private, or the other way around. They can also be eradicated, as with several
communicable diseases (such as smallpox). Or they can move from the open
public sphere into tight state control. For example, weapons of mass destruction
are usually kept under close guard. Some governments also try to recapture small
arms, such as guns, through special weapon surrender programs. Moreover, there
is growing concern about how to reduce the risks of germ warfare as well as a host
of new security threats against which present defense systems cannot protect
the public.

The standard definition of public goods could be interpreted to indicate a
good’s potential of being public. 

It could be restated as:

'''Definition 1''': Goods have a special potential for being public if they have
nonexcludable benefits, nonrival benefits, or both.

This definition does not differ much from the current textbook definition
except that it does not automatically categorize public or private goods based
merely on (non)rivalry and (non)excludability—properties clearly malleable and
subject to change by policy choice. This serves as a reminder to explore whether
and to what extent all goods with the potential for publicness are public in practice.

If a good is found not to be public, it is worth asking whether this is desirable
from various viewpoints, including considerations of efficiency and equity.


The complementary definition, referring to the actual properties of public
goods, would be:

'''Definition 2''': Goods are de facto public if they are nonexclusive and available
for all to consume.

This definition underscores the often temporary properties of goods. Some
goods may be in the public domain today but not tomorrow. They may not have
been in the public domain before—or even existed—but have slipped into it, perhaps
due to new technologies. Examples include the recent phenomenons of computer
viruses and Internet-based crime. Thus this definition stresses the need for
society to be vigilant—to constantly scan the development horizon to assess
whether a policy choice that seemed preferable at one time still holds. Moreover,
it clarifies that the main determinant of publicness is inclusivity: the goods’ being
there de facto for all to consume. Public goods are not just market failures, and
they are not merely state-produced goods. The public and private domains exist
on their own, beyond states and markets.

It can even be argued that the state and the market are part of the public
domain: they are both public goods. In its original and present form the market
is an institution that is largely public. All can participate, and the more actors there
are in the market, the more competitive and (potentially) more efficient it will be.
Of course, to participate in the market, a person needs to have something to
exchange. That many people lack means of exchange does not speak against the
market as a public good. Instead it signals a problem with the distribution of
income.

Similarly, a well-functioning state is a public good. The more people who
accept and use the state apparatus, the greater is its legitimacy. So, a state that
builds its strength not on coercion but on legitimacy needs to be inclusive.As the
market and the state show, being nonrival in consumption facilitates a good’s
inclusivity or publicness. But by itself this property does not create publicness.

Nonrival goods, including knowledge, are merely goods that by design lend themselves
to being made public. As noted, additional users do not reduce the goods’
availability, and allowing wider consumption often enhances efficiency.
Although some goods have significant characteristics of publicness, some
potential consumers may find it impossible to acquire them. Take the Internet. To
use it, individuals usually need to have command over private means—to be able
to afford a computer, telephone line, and related costs. So, the Internet is not fully
in the public domain. Similarly, illiterate people remain excluded from large parts
of the world’s knowledge because they cannot absorb knowledge that exists in
written form. Only goods that are truly available for all people to consume qualify
as de facto or fully public. The consumption of a public good can be voluntary:
some people may want to enjoy a beautiful sunset, others may not. Or it can
be mandatory: it is usually a requirement to respect traffic rules.
The case of access barriers must be distinguished from that of some individuals
being able to afford a private exit strategy (up to a point) from a public condition.
For example, people can protect themselves against crime and violence by
increasing the number of locks on their doors. But crime and violence remain in
the public domain. Making greater use of private goods to compensate for
degraded public goods—such as a public domain filled with negative externalities
and threats to human security and well-being—is what Cropper and Oates (1992)
call averting behavior. It may allow some individuals to avoid harm to their wellbeing,
often at high cost.But it does not change the character of the public domain.

In sum, public goods are those that are in the public domain because they are
technically nonexcludable, because they are placed or left there by policy choice,
or because they are allowed to be there inadvertently.To the extent that access barriers
limit their consumption, they are only partly public. Public goods thus form
important components of the public domain, but the public domain is more than
the ensemble of public goods.

More than the notion of public goods, the concept of the public domain is
actively and often heatedly debated. In some societies a public sphere remains a
rather unfamiliar concept. Yet as markets and states have expanded and become
more differentiated, they have moved out of and away from individual households,
creating the private domain and the public. The actors in the public space
are primarily civil society organizations and the general public. But they are also
firms pursuing profits within publicly defined parameters and in the public spotlight.
The suggestion here is to refer to the various goods in the public sphere—
tangible and intangible—as public goods.


'''EXPANDING THE THEORY OF PUBLIC GOODS'''

A more active, policy-driven approach to identifying public goods opens the door
for an equivalent expansion of other aspects of public goods theory and research.
The proposed expansion of the definition of public goods could thus be accompanied
by further analyses of various provision-related policy issues. Here four
such issues are discussed: public choices, the difference between publicness in consumption
and publicness in utility, aggregation technologies and strategies, and
the adequacy of provision.


'''Re-envisioning public choices'''

The literature on public economics and finance usually emphasizes that the provision
of public goods involves both a political process and a production process.
The political process is usually seen as being concerned with fiscal decisions.
Voters and taxpayers are seen as having to decide how to allocate their resources
between private and public spending—and for public spending, expressing their
preferences for certain public goods. The question of whether and to what extent
to make certain goods public (or private) is usually not considered.
Considerable attention is devoted to how politicians and government agents
could encourage individuals to reveal their preferences for public goods. The reason
is that public goods, being available for all to consume once they are produced,
are predicted to suffer from free riding. Put differently, individuals are likely to
understate their preferences for these goods to avoid being taxed and to make others
pay so that they can enjoy the goods free of charge.

Some public economics scholars see government as a solution to free riding,
however difficult it might be to make individuals reveal their preferences.But others
add to this challenge a host of problems stemming from the fact that politicians
and government agents tend to act in “rational,” welfare-maximizing ways.
They are likely to pursue not only the mandates and tasks entrusted to them by
voters but also their own agendas. For politicians that could involve a desire to be
reelected; for bureaucrats, an interest in advancing their careers.

Much public choice theory was formulated before the 1980s, so its focus on
the formal political process and on state agents is not surprising. The worldwide
swing toward markets took off only in the 1990s (Held and others 1999), as did
the tremendous growth in civil society (Anheier, Glasius, and Kaldor 2001). Yet
even newer contributions to the topic, such as principal-agent and transaction
cost theory (Dixit 1996), stay within the context of the state.

As noted, policymaking happens in a variety of ways. Because of its legislative
and coercive powers, the state still plays a special role. But decisions on issues
related to public goods are also driven by financial and other public pressures on
businesses, by interactions within civil society, and by demands from civil society
organizations to be consulted by governments and to influence how governments
and politicians implement their mandates from voters. The public wants to be
closely involved in selecting, designing, and even producing public goods—and
in watching out for possible undesirable public effects that could accompany private
goods or result from private consumption and production (negative externalities).
16 Sometimes it even seems like the public is not hiding or understating
its preferences at all. In such cases the problem is getting the attention of policymakers.
Given this altered state of policymaking, it is important to widen the focus of
public choice theory and to initiate theoretical and empirical research on how
political decisionmaking on public goods actually functions. A principle to be
reconsidered in this context is fiscal equivalence, first formulated by Breton (1965)
and Olson (1971 [1965]). The principle suggests that the scope of a good’s benefits
be matched with jurisdictional borders. Doing so ensures that those affected
by a good can participate in decisions about its provision and that the good
reflects local preferences and conditions.Put differently, local public goods should
be provided locally, national public goods at the level of the central government,
and global public goods at the international level.

Because the provision of public goods is not just a state-centered process, it
is important to broaden the fiscal equivalence principle. Perhaps it could be reformulated
as an “equivalence of publicness” principle calling for the matching of
the circle of stakeholders in a particular public good with the circle of participants
in negotiations on its provision, either with a consultative or a decisionmaking
voice. To achieve such equivalence—particularly in the international context—
decisionmaking would need to expand across fiscal or political jurisdictions to
encompass all the stakeholders for the good in question.

Differentiating between publicness in consumption and publicness in utility
As also underscored by Breton (1965, p. 176), that a good’s benefits are public in
consumption “is independent of the subjective evaluation which individuals
attach to the objective benefits derived from the good.”Consider financial stability.
In many countries the provision of this good requires the central bank to
maintain adequate reserves—often at high cost. Although poor people benefit
from financial stability, they may not consider this public good a top priority. So
while financial stability is public in consumption, poor people probably do not
gain as much from it as do richer people.

To determine whether and to what extent publicness in consumption and
utility overlap, one could determine whether consuming a particular public good
adds in similar measure to what people can and want to do (Sen 1982).Not every
public good can be expected to provide similar satisfaction to all population
groups.Yet there is a widely shared view that the public sphere should be fair and
just—a sphere of civility and decency. Indeed, it often seems that promoting a fair
and just public domain is precisely why the public wants to be more involved in
decisionmaking on public goods.

It can be argued that the arena—and era—of publicness has emerged to better
ensure that goods public in form (in consumption) are also public in substance
(with benefits distributed equitably across population groups). For example,
traditional judicial systems assign women a small fraction of the voice of men but
are often highly public in consumption—there to judge both men and women.
As a result, in some cases they are advantageous to men and disadvantageous to
women. Until recently women were often not part of public decisionmaking and
so traditionally have observed the public domain with concern—and often sharp
critique.

Other disempowered groups hold similar views. Thus civil society, with its
strengthened engagement in public policymaking, is seeking to change the “not
so public” nature of the public sphere. Perhaps precisely because of these efforts,
methodologies should be developed to systematically assess individual public
goods and the public domain as a whole against two criteria:

• The publicness—or participatory nature—of decisionmaking on which goods
to place in the public domain, how much of them to produce, how to shape
them, and how to distribute their benefits among all concerned.

• The publicness—or equity—of the distribution of benefits; that is, the extent
to which various groups (consumers of public goods) derive benefits.


These two criteria can be combined with the main, distinguishing criterion of
public goods:

• The publicness of consumption—the nonexclusiveness of the consumption
of public goods across individuals and groups.

Combining these three criteria (or dimensions) of publicness results, as suggested
by Kaul (2001), in an ideal “triangle of publicness” (figure 4). This triangle shows
a good that is public in consumption, based on decisionmaking that fully meets
the condition of the generalized equivalence principle, and with net benefits
evenly distributed across diverse population groups.

Refining the concept of aggregation technologies and strategies
Public goods are often still equated with state-provided goods—for a reason. From
the 1940s to the 1970s the state played a prominent role in their provision. In particular,
the state provided many essentially private goods such as fertilizer, steel,
and communication systems. In most countries these goods have been moved into
the private domain and into markets.Yet while the state was often taken out of the
production of tangible, excludable goods, it was expected to become more active
in the provision of more intangible but equally real and important goods, such as
respect for law or the creation of incentives for private activity.

It is probably because of the long-standing equation of public goods with
state-provided goods that only in 1983 did Hirshleifer draw attention to the fact
that “standard models have assumed…that there is nothing at all special on the
supply side, in the social technology for the production of public goods” (p. 372).

He proposed examining alternatives such as “social composition functions, i.e. as
different possible ways of amalgamating individual productions into social availabilities
of a public good” (p. 372, italics in the original). Since then a debate has
emerged on the aggregation technologies for various types of public goods. The
three main technologies are summation, weakest link, and best shot.

Public goods can require various inputs from different aggregation technologies.

Climate stability is often mentioned as an example of a summation
process because it requires all countries to limit carbon dioxide emissions to certain
levels. Yet some of the building blocks of this good show that other aggregation
technologies are also used, such as the required technological advances in
cleaner energy that may be achieved through a best shot strategy (see figure 2 in
the chapter on institutions by Kaul and Le Goulven in this volume). Furthermore,
enabling all countries to stay within certain emission limits could call for a weakest
link strategy of providing development assistance.

Moreover, different building blocks could be based on different production
or public policy partnerships, each following different incentives and requiring
different types of financing. The question of how the production of public goods
works has found limited attention because for many years public goods were often
financed and produced by the state. But since the 1980s government has become
less involved in the production of essentially private goods such as telecommunication
services. Meanwhile, it has played a larger role in creating an enabling
framework for private and voluntary activities.

Yet few studies have followed particular goods to study how these changes
have affected the goods’ public-private properties and production processes.
There has often been an outcry about the marketization of goods. But an important
dimension is whether and to what extent marketization has been—or failed
to be—accompanied by public incentives to enable private actors to internalize
externalities. This information is important for understanding why goods may or
may not have been underprovided in certain instances.

In today’s multiactor world it is thus critical to think beyond the main types
of social aggregation technologies. It is important to examine in more detail the
various building blocks of public goods, exploring especially the types of incentives
that different groups, notably private actors, might require to be motivated
and able to deliver their expected contributions to a particular public good.


'''ADVANCING THE CONCEPT OF PUBLIC GOODS''' 

Moving from optimal public spending to adequate provision
The provision of public goods is usually considered optimal when the “Samuelson
condition” is met. This condition, formulated by Paul A. Samuelson (1954),
requires that the sum of all individuals’ marginal willingness to pay for an additional
unit of a particular public good equal the marginal cost of producing that
unit. The main issue here is not that it could be difficult to ascertain and aggregate
societal preferences. It is that the Samuelson condition does only what it was
intended to do—provide guidance on how to adapt government revenue and
spending to the preferences of the consumers of state-provided services.But a balanced
pattern of spending and preferences does not necessarily indicate that a
public good is adequately provided.

Assume, for example, that effective global control of HIV/AIDS would cost
$10 billion a year in additional international funding, but that voters—taxpayers,
and hence governments—are willing to spend only $2 billion more a year. The
good—control of HIV/AIDS—could be considered optimally provided from a
budget viewpoint. But its provision would be suboptimal or inadequate from a
technical viewpoint. Moreover, not all required spending would have to come
from government sources. For HIV/AIDS, all actor groups contribute.

It is thus desirable to expand the discussion of the provision of public goods
in two ways. First, technical criteria for adequate provision should be formulated
for each public good. These technical assessments could then form the basis for
economic (cost-benefit) assessments of each good. The main question for technically
underprovided goods is whether enhancing their provision promises high
social returns.Most public goods are nothing “good” in themselves. They should
be promoted only if they enhance economic growth and people’s well-being. But
to know their value to the economy and society, they have to be assessed in a development
context, not just a budget framework.

The well-established theory of public goods carries the marks of bygone eras.

The first era—from the late 1940s to the late 1970s—saw the state playing a leading
role in the economy, even in market economies. The second—starting in the
late 1970s and early 1980s—was marked by a rebalancing between markets and
states. Today’s theory of public goods defines public goods as market failures but
leaves the rest of the debate within the framework of the state and the theories of
the first era. Now that a new multiactor era has emerged, and with it new concerns
about the balance between public and private goods, the theory of public
goods requires further expansion. The basic challenge is to regain a timely notion
of public goods in general. But there is an additional challenge: to begin to understand
global public goods."
(http://www.undp.org/globalpublicgoods/globalization/pdfs/KaulMendoza.pdf)


=More Information=

#[[Global Public Goods]]


[[Category:Peerproperty]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Policy]]