
'''Essay: [[Aesthetic Commons]] and the enclosures of instituting autonomies. [[Jordi Claramonte]].'''

URL = http://jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com/2009/10/aesthetic-commons.html


=Abstract=

"All aesthetic processes run along repertoires of historically determined forms and they are exercised with the deployment of a number of competences which update and make real the forms of those repertoires. Both together, repertoires and competences, may then constitute generative pattern languages. These pattern languages are commons and work as such, since the only conceivable way for them to be produced, improved and transmitted is through the individual manufacturing of a longer lasting sensitive and intellectual milieu, a kind of “aesthetic laboratorium” as Marx would have called it. 

It is obvious these aesthetic commons, as most other commons, have undergone -and are still subjected to- their own “enclosures” as part of the institution of capitalist societies. Whenever these enclosures have been effective enough, we might find the access to the arable lands of aesthetic forms restricted and codified behind the walls of high culture. Behind such walls these lands have been devoted to pasture for the professional artists, curators and other experts while the very competences necessary to sustain any productive aesthetic sensitivity have been systematically neglected or made irrelevant.

Most of the aesthetic concepts we can use to contrast our own, such as medieval modes, Greek ethoi or Hindu ragas are based on modal proceedings which also combine definite forms and modulating competences. Therefore some basic research is needed to make an essential contribution to fight the “tragedy of the anticommons ” which poses a real threat to most of intellectual and aesthetic generativeness,. Along this research something should become clearer about these aesthetic commons and how they can contribute to the more general issue of autonomy and instituting competences. 

Our presentation will focus on the need to think over our paradigms of aesthetic sensitivity, aesthetic reception and artistic productivity to understand how deeply the aesthetic is related to commons both in a social and an anthropological level."
(http://jordiclaramonte.blogspot.com/2009/10/aesthetic-commons.html)


[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Articles]]