

A project of http://www.urbanfablab.it/

=Description=

"African Fabbers is a social innovation and non-profit project promoted by Urban FabLab. The project is  based on the idea of bridging the African and the European makers communities through workshops, collaborative projects, talks etc. The African Fabbers project develops a temporary and itinerant fablab putting emphasis on the open source hardware approach for sustainable technologies and urban ecologies. Therefore our Lab organizes free workshops dedicated to African and European makers, students and artisans selected by the local cultural institutions and by an open public call. The workshops are developed in order to share an opportunity to creative clusters from different continents and backgrounds to meet up and share knowledge, to investigate the interaction between African material systems and computer aided design technologies.

...


African Fabbers is a project curated by Paolo Cascone with Urban FabLab and Maria Giovanna Mancini. Urban FabLab  is a cultural association as well as a lab of ecological design and digital fabrication powered by COdesignLab. The FabLab, hosted by the Science Centre of Naples (Italy), aims to promote the design to make culture integrating advanced and low technologies for collaborative projects with local communities. The project is supported among the others by: COdesignLab, Fondazione Idis/Città della Scienza (Italy), Fondazione architetti e ingegneri liberi professionisti iscritti INARCassa; among the local partners of the project in Dakar: Ker Thiossane, Afropixel, Dakar Biennale"
(http://www.digicult.it/news/african-fabbers-project/)

[[Category:Manufacturing]]

[[Category:Africa]]

[[Category:Senegal]]