
* Book: After the Nation State: Citizens, Tribalism and the New World Disorder. by Matthew Horsman and Andrew Marshall. HarperCollins, 1995.

URL = http://www.amazon.co.uk/After-Nation-State-Citizens-Tribalism/dp/0006383866

=Description=

"What are the political and economic forces for change worldwide, and who will address and manage that change? Does the nation-state still have a role? This book attempts to answer these questions. The authors trace the birth of the nation-state, its swift rise, and its expansion from Europe to the new nations of America, Asia and Africa. They argue that the nation-state has now reached a point of crisis as a form of political, economic and social organization, with the result that the world is likely to experience a period of growing tensions and instability. Whilst a limited control will be retained over more local issues, in other areas control will have to be forfeited. Consequently, nationalism and tribalism will find themselves in competition - this is bound to affect the relationship of citizens to states, and hence the character of nationalism itself. Drawing on an analysis of the nation-state and its past and future rivals, this book argues that the time has come for a reappraisal of the nation-state's role. It concludes that the 21st century will be about running capitalism and managing tribalism - the tension between the two will be the hallmark of international politics in the decades to come."


[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Global Governance]]

[[Category:Books]]