'''* Article: Arran Gare. Against Posthumanismm: Posthumanism as the World Vision of House-Slaves. Borderless Philosophy 4 (2021): 1-56.''' 

URL = https://www.cckp.space/single-post/bp-4-2021-arran-gare-against-posthumanism-posthumanism-as-the-world-vision-of-house-slaves


=Excerpts=

==Posthumanism as directed against humanism==

Arran Gare:

"While Haraway and Hayles were trying to find some residual place for humanism within
information science (and it appears that Hayles has since come under the influence of
the biosemioticians), those who embraced the notion of the posthumanism evinced a
deep hostility to humanism. 

For instance, Primod Nayar in Posthumanism (2014, p.22)
referring to “[[Critical Posthumanism]],”, wrote:

- ''Critical posthumanism shifts away from the moral transhumanist position in one very significant way. Moral transhumanism believes we can accentuate and enhance specific human qualities (such as compassion) for the greater good of life on earth – but with this it retains a very clear idea of the desirable qualities of the human. The human is still the centre of all things desirable, necessary and aspirational. In the case of critical posthumanism, it treats the “essential” attributes of the human as always already imbricated with other life forms, where the supposedly “core” human features, whether physiology, anatomy or consciousness, have co-evolved with other life forms. Where moral transhumanism seeks enhancement of supposedly innate human features and qualities, critical posthumanism rejects the very idea of anything innate to the human, arguing instead for a messy congeries of qualities developed over centuries through the human's interactions with the environment (which includes non-organic tools and organic life)''.

Similarly, Rosi Braidotti wrote in The Posthuman (2013, p.1) that

- ''the concept of the human has exploded under the double pressure of contemporary scientific advances and global economic concerns. After the postmodern, the postcolonial, the post-industrial, the post-communist and even the much-contested postfeminist conditions, we seem to have entered the post-human predicament''.

She then set out to defend a posthuman subject based on the notion of autopoiesis, that is, second order cybernetics.

Embracing Foucault’s proclamation of the “death of man” appears to be central
to the thinking of these posthumanists, with the advance of information science
providing justification for their allegiance to Foucault and providing direction for
their militant attack on humanism. Their world vision is a complete negation not only
of the humanism that emerged with the New Left in their reaction to Stalinism and
domination of the West by the military-industrial complex, but also to the whole
history of humanism with its struggle for autonomy, democracy and social justice
from the pre-Socratics and defenders of the Republic in Rome to the Renaissance and
then the Radical Enlightenment. As noted, Foucault’s critique of humanism was
technical, directed principally against Kant, and his “death of man” proclamation
appears as something of a rhetorical flourish. However, humanism had been criticised
by a number of philosophers, including Heidegger, who had reacted to Sartre’s
affirmation of humanism in his Letter on Humanism, as well as by the structuralists and
poststructuralists. The posthumanists have interpreted Foucault as being aligned with
a broader tradition of posthumanism. To support this anti-humanism, they have
embraced information science and the technologies advanced through it in order to
question the boundaries that defined human beings in the past, associated with
embodiment, claiming along with the transhumanists that we can extend ourselves
beyond embodiment through new technologies. There is now no clear division
between what people are and what their technology is, or for that matter, what other
forms of life are or what is not alive. We are largely made up of non-human microorganisms moving in and out of what had previously been regarded as the boundaries of the body. 

As information processors, what had been taken to be humans are now
seen as continuous with the physical processes around them. From this reductionist
perspective, there is nothing but energy, information, and matter (Gare, 2020). Since
information technology emerged during World War II and has been driven by the
drive to augment military and industrial power, posthumanism amounts to accepting
our complete absorption into the military-industrial complex.

Posthumanism is claimed to be anti-elitist and aligned with ecological thinking,
but offers a debased view of life and provides no place for people taking responsibility
for ecological destruction. Those who call for the development of such responsibility
are in the long tradition of humanism and therefore politically incorrect. As became
clear from New Left thinking, it was the elimination from orthodox Marxism of a
conception of humans as subjects whose humanity could be cultivated, but who could
also be dehumanized, that paved the way for the brutality of Stalinism. Slavery
amounted to a failure to acknowledge the humanity of people and their potential; and
depriving people of access to the means of production and treating their creative
potential as a commodity, as labour-power, dependent upon others who could
destroy their livelihoods, had also been shown by Marx to be a form of slavery. A
conception of the world and people as machines, and identifying reason with
instrumental rationality, produces a one-dimensional culture that eliminates the basis
for even criticising this dehumanization. Orthodox Marxism as developed in the
Soviet Union had simply reproduced such thinking in a slightly different form. The
development of philosophical anthropology, characterizing humans and their
potential, and showing which potentialities should be realized, provided the basis for
challenging and overcoming such thinking both theoretically and in practice. This
conception of humans, while differentiating humans from other kinds of living beings,
was the basis for reconceiving the nature and life. Showing that even plants have
Umwelten, surrounding worlds that have meaning for them and that semiosis, the
production and interpretation of signs, is central to all life, including ecosystems, has
provided the basis for defending the intrinsic significance of all life. To conceive life
as nothing but information processing cyborgs is a rejection of this work, without even
acknowledging it, and undermines the basis for any appreciation of this intrinsic
significance and eliminates completely any possibility of challenging domination by
instrumental rationality (Gare, 2020).

Beyond this, it is difficult to gain a clear picture of what the posthumanists
stand for. Continuing deconstructive postmodernists scepticism about reason and
anti-elitism, they simultaneously uphold being non-judgemental as a virtue while
engaging in enforcing political correctness and upholding the new “cancel culture,”
defending this on supposedly scientific grounds."

(https://www.cckp.space/single-post/bp-4-2021-arran-gare-against-posthumanism-posthumanism-as-the-world-vision-of-house-slaves)

[[Category:Post-Human]]
[[Category:P2P Theory]]