
=Discussion=

How Agamben revises and corrects Foucault:

Enrico Beltramini:

==Power==

"In his attempt to redefine power, Foucault introduces the notion of ‘economy
of power’ (Foucault, 1977: 25). According to Foucault (1979: 92), power is not
a substance or thing, rather
It seems to me that power must be understood in the first instance as the
multiplicity of force relations immanent in the sphere in which they operate
and which constitute their own organization.

For Foucault, power is not related to some form of class, gender, racial, or
economic structure, nor is it a resource or a stock; it is, rather, the production
of a set of relations of forces. From the perspective of a systemic conception
of power, power is framed as the final result of an organization of different
actors, technologies, materiality, and forms of knowledge. For Foucault, a premodern organization (or regime) of power is based on sovereignty. In the
modern age, sovereign forms of power are replaced by a governmental form
of power, the expression of a biopolitics of the population. I will revisit this
replacement theory later.

This governmental form of power is the economy of power. Foucault never
attempted a definition of ‘economy of power’. However, the expression stands
for power as administration, or eventually for power as management. If power
is a system of forces, economy of power is the administrative, i.e., the
regulating, measuring, calculating modus operandi of this system. This notion
of an economy of power has become, since Foucault’s initial contribution,
increasingly influential. Although inaugurated with Foucault in recent times,
this concept of ‘economy of power’ has a long history beginning with the
notion of oikonomia, which is the Greek term understood in Aristotle and
Xenophon as the administration of the oikos, the house. In Ancient Greece, in
fact, economy suggested an ordering, or a form of management. Foucault used
the term dispositif, often translated into English as ‘apparatus’; it is derived 
from the Latin disposito, which is one translation of oikonomia. I will return to
this.

For Foucault, a ‘profound transformation’ of the ‘mechanisms of power’ in the
West is the eclipse of the political by the economical that occurred in the
transition from the classical age to modernity (Foucault, 1979: 136).
According to Foucault, the transition marks the transformation of the forms
of power relations, from sovereign power to biopower. In the pre-modern
world, sovereign power was characterized by a king’s right over the life and
death of his subjects. Yet, there was no serious attempt by kings to regulate
the people who lived in their domains. Sovereign power was ‘essentially a
right of seizure: of things, time, bodies, and ultimately life itself’ (Foucault,
1979: 136). Whereas sovereign power was the power of the king to appropriate
property, labor, or the lives of his subjects (a juridical-political form of power),
biopower in modern times is characterized by the governance of specific
populations as objects (an economic-administrative form of power). In the
modern period, governments take an active interest in the lives of the people
(i.e., biopolitics) and people have turned from constitutive political body into
population: a demographical biological entity (Agamben, 2005b). Biopower
aims to regulate, manage, and administer the life of the people who live in a
nation state. It is a regulatory mechanism of power that allows the state to
administrate and monitor the nation through institutions such as health care,
education, tax collection, and military drafting. Thus, Foucault argues that
pre-modern power was characterized by sovereignty rationality, while
modern power is characterized by a governmental rationality. For Foucault,
power has changed its character from a juridical-political system to a
regulating administration. Foucault defines governmentality as allowing for a
complex form of ‘power which has the population as its target, political
economy as its major form of knowledge, and apparatuses of security as its
essential technical instrument’ (Foucault, 2009: 107-8).

According to Agamben, Foucault is correct in assuming a distinction between
a juridical-political understanding of the state, ultimately concerned with
questions of legitimacy, on one hand, and on the other concerned with the
economic-administrative significance of government finalized to a regulatory
approach to citizens’ life. However, Agamben suggests that Foucault misses 
the point in postulating an essential continuity between the original juridicalpolitical orientation of the state, based on sovereignty, and the economicadministrative orientation of government, or biopolitics. Agamben in fact
refuses the idea that power has abandoned politics and law for embracing
economy and administration: in his opinion, Western politics has been since
its inception biopolitics, i.e., concerned with the government of the living.
The source of this difference of opinions between Foucault and Agamben
resides, at least according to Agamben, in two different genealogies of power.
For Foucault, the origins of power are located in a theological-political
paradigm, for Agamben, in a theological-economic paradigm.


==Genealogy==
In The kingdom and the glory (2011b: 13) Agamben claims that there are ‘two
broadly speaking political paradigms’, both
… derive from Christian theology... in a broad, antinomous but functionally
connected way: political theology, which founds in the one God the
transcendence of sovereign power, and economic theology, which substitutes
for this the idea of an oikonmia, conceived as an immanent order – domestic
and not political in the strict sense – as much of the divine life as of the human
one. From the first derives political philosophy and the modern theory of
sovereignty; from the second, modern biopolitics up to the current triumph of
economy and government over every other aspect of social life.
It is a dense quote. Agamben enquires the genealogy of the two paradigms
that power has assumed throughout the history of the West. He argues that
both paradigms find their origins in Christian theology. Political theology
derives from the notion of the sovereign power of a single God. Agamben
already discussed the first paradigm specifically in Homo Sacer and State of
exception, where he further developed the work of Carl Schmitt. Economic
theology, instead, results from the idea of a domestic, not political
administration of both divine and human life (respectively, Trinity and
creation). Political philosophy and the modern theory of sovereignty derive
from the first paradigm; modern biopolitics up to the current triumph of
economy and government over every other aspect of social life derive from
the second paradigm. In The kingdom and the glory, he investigates the second
paradigm.

Agamben traces the patterns of conceptual descent in current theories of
government to economic theology, aligned with the now fashionable line of
reasoning introduced by Mark Lilla in his The stillborn god (2007). Agamben
argues that investigations into the nature of executive power in the West have
operated within a framework that, taking its departure from Carl Schmitt’s
analysis of sovereignty, have remained essentially within the horizon of
political theology (which founds the transcendence of sovereign power on the
single God), with biopolitics understood as a phenomenon of political
theology. Agamben, however, sustains that it is not political theology but
rather economic theology (the idea of an immanent ordering) that is the
interpretive paradigm of reference in which to investigate the source the
triumph of economy and government over all forms of contemporary life. In
this sense, The kingdom and the glory is an investigation of the ways and the
reasons for which executive power came to assume, in the West, the form of
an oikonomia, that of a government of humans (Agamben, 2011b).

Not only does Agamben establish a connection between government and the
notion of the oikonomia (economy); he frames the nature of this connection.
The English word ‘government’ has Greek and Latin ancestries: initially, it
takes the form of oikonomia (economy); then it was conceived as a form of
arrangement and disposition, being translated later in Latin
as disposition (apparatus). From the initial definition of oikonomia as
‘economy’, or ‛administration of the house’, Agamben traces the
ramifications of the significance and understanding of this term. He seeks to
understand the current conception of government in light of an important but
rarely acknowledged transformation in the idea of government brought about
by Christianity. Through a careful exposition of early Christian theology,
Agamben demonstrates that economy, not politics, is the intellectual
offspring of government. But the activity the ancients termed ‘economy,’
assumes today, he argues, the form of what is called ‘administration,’ or
‘management’.

Thus, ‘economy’, ‘administration’, and ‘management’ are all terms that can
be used synonymously: government is a form of management. For Aristotle,
economy is a non-epistemic paradigm, something that is not a science or an
episteme, but rather a praxis which implies decisions and measures that can 
be understood only in relation to a given situation and a given problem. What
emerges is a sense that economy is distinguished from politics in not being
law-governed. Rather, it is a series of ad hoc measures suited to each
particular situation, and so economy can never be the object of a science
properly-so-called. Xenophon, an ancient Greek philosopher, used the
analogy of a ship on a voyage, where there is a captain and yet everyone is
immediately responsible for everything, shifting their strategies according to
ever-changing conditions. Agamben maintains that this notion of ad hoc,
non-rule-governed management is the semantic core of the term. In addition
to ‘administration of the household’, he notes, the concept has to do with an
ordered functioning and has often been associated with a managerial or
operational focus. To put it briefly: the key to understanding the
contemporary mechanisms of power, including forms of economic power, lies,
according to Agamben, in a properly theoretical research into the concept of
human praxis. In Agamben, praxis is an activity, but not really a productive
activity; it is rather a willed practical activity, a practical activity in which
human will finds expression (Agamben, 1999).

Agamben sees in modern and present-day models of political activity the
unmistakable footprint of the fourth and fifth-century ‘economic’ doctrine of
the Trinity (‘divine life’). The starting point of Agamben’s investigation is, in
fact, the history of the early Church and the elaboration of the Trinitarian
doctrine as a form of domestic administration, or economy, or oikonomia. In
the early centuries of Christianity, in order to reconcile monotheism with
God’s threefold nature, theologians introduced oikonomia, economy, in terms
of an administration of divine life. God, as far as his substance or being is
concerned, is one. But as for his oikonomia, his economy – that is to say the
way He manages the divine house – He is three. Thus, the ‘divine life’, the
Trinity, is a ‘divine economy’, the administration of the divine house. These
early church theologians distinguished two discourses: the ontological
discourse, concerning God’s being, and the economical discourse which refers
to God’s action and to how He manages His house. This articulation
of theologia and oikonomia, the being of God and the activity of God,
‘introduces personality and action into the being of God’ (Agamben, 2011b: 

18). Agamben argues that the economy of divine life (the Trinitarian model)
is a crucial point in the genealogy of governmentality.

In The kingdom and the glory, Agamben explains that it is not the monotheistic
political theology that culminates in the theory of sovereignty, but rather the
notion of divine oikonomia that ultimately underwrites modern biopolitics.
Moreover, Agamben shares with other scholars, including Erik Peterson
(1890-1960), a recent line of reasoning that traces the patterns of conceptual
descent in current theories of democracy in the patristic ‘economic’
paradigms in theology. He argues that a theological-economic paradigm
operates better than a theological-political paradigm for understanding the
relation between the sovereign power and biopower.


==Government==

At this point, Agamben moves from the administration of the divine life, the
Trinity, to the administration of human life, the divine government of the
world, or providence. ‘Providence – according to Agamben – just means the
divine government’ (Agamben, 2011c: n.p.). Providence means that God is
constantly at work governing the world. If He stops for a single instance, the
world (His creation) would collapse. But how does divine government, how
does providence, operate? Providence is conceived as a double machine.
Theologians distinguish between a general providence and a special
providence. The former establishes the universal laws, the universal and
transcendent laws, and the first causes. Theologians call this ordinatio, Latin
for ordering order. The latter is entrusted to the angels or to the mechanisms
of immanent and secondary causes. Theologians call this execution, executio.
So, the machine of the divine government is order and execution (Agamben,
2011b: 142). However, order and execution are not linked together in the
context of a theological-political paradigm, but of a theological-economic
paradigm. What does it mean? It means that, in a theological-economic
paradigm, execution is not subordinated to order, special providence is not
secondary to general providence. In fact, general providence and special
providence, ontology and economy, order and execution, are autonomous to
each other yet operating in mutual coordination. To understand this model,
one has to go back to the Trinity.

Back to the Trinity. Christian theologians articulated a distinction between
God’s being and God’s action. The distinction between the being of God and
the activity of God, God’s being and God’s action, implies the question of the
relationship between the two: is God’s action based on God’s being? The
Father, the first person of the Trinity, is without beginning or foundation. The
Father is anarchos, without beginning. Christ, the Son, who is the logos, the
word and the action of God, Agamben argues, is supposed to be grounded in
the Father. But He is not. The doctrine of the Church, in fact, ultimately states
that the Son, the Christ, is anarchos, without beginning or foundation, exactly
like the Father. Christ, the Son, the Logos, the Word and the action of God, is
not grounded in the Father, rather is anarchical like the Father. He is
without arché, without foundation without beginning, exactly like the Father.
So, Christ is completely independent. This is the paradox of divine anarchy:
God’s action is completely independent from God’s being. Agamben notes
three implications of this theological move. An effect of this is the anarchic,
groundless character of action.

This thesis of the anarchy of the Christ … implies that language and action –
as the divine language and the divine action – had no foundation in being, are
in this sense anarchical. This means that the classical Greek ontology with its
idea of a substantial link between being and logos, being and language, but also
between being and praxis, action, is ruined forever. Any attempt, since that
moment to found language on being is doomed to fail. (Agamben, 2011c: n.p.)
God’s being is the Father, the first person of the Trinity. God’s action is the
Son, the second person of the Trinity. Together, they identify the double
structure of the government of the world. This bipolar machine, Agamben
argues, is a constant in Christian thought. The same bipolar machine is
postulated with regard to the divine administration of the world. This is the
conjunction of this doctrine of the divine economy with the divine
government of the world. Since the beginning of the theory of power, there is
a double structure. The divine economy is a dual structure; the Government
is a dual structure. This dual structure implies the necessity of some form of
government that governs the entire system.

It is precisely because being and action are both anarchical in this sense,
precisely for that reason, something such as a government – the word
government comes from the Greek kybernetes, which mean the Pilot of a ship, 
to guide the ship. So precisely because being and action are both anarchical, a
government becomes possible and even necessary. It is the groundless and
anarchical paradigm of human action that makes it possible to govern this
action. (Agamben, 2011c: n.p.)

Precisely because being and action are both anarchical, government becomes
necessary.

It is well known that the division between the power that authorizes the action
(auctoritas) and the power of acting (potestas) is supplemented in the
theological genealogy of politics. In the tradition of political philosophy this
double structure is expressed in the old formula: The king reigns, but he
doesn't govern. Agamben (2011c) notes that this is an old dictum, which had
already been founded by the 16th century. In modern democracy this division
between kingdom and government is the division in legislative or sovereign
power, which acts always through universal laws and principles, and executive
power, which carries out in detail the general principle. Agamben agrees that
this division exists but refuses to identify any juridical-political relationship
between the two. In fact, he notes, the relationship between God’s being and
God’s action is that of reciprocal coordination in autonomy. Similarly, the
relationship between executive power and sovereign power is economical,
driven by an administrative, not a political or juridical concern.

In theology, the administration of the world is precisely what results from the
coordination and articulation of God’s being and God’s action, general
providence and special providence. The same can be said in the theory of
power: Government is the result of the mutual coordination and articulation
of sovereign power and executive power. Nobody exercises Government;
Government is the spontaneous result of the mutual adjustment between one
form of power and another. In Agamben’s (2011c: n.p.) words,
No matter how theologians conceive the relationship between the two poles, in
any case, the bipolar structure must be present. If they are completely divided,
no government is possible. There would be on the one hand side an almighty
sovereign who is effectively impotent, and on the other, the chaotic mess of the
particular acts of interventions of governance. A government is possible only if
the two aspects are coordinated in a bipolar machine. So I will define
government when you will have the coordination of these two elements.
General law and an execution, general providence and particular providence.

Modern theory considers sovereignty as the central political category and
reduces Government to government, executive power. As a result, Agamben
notes, political philosophy fails to understand the real nature of Government
and focuses instead on universal problems. But the bipolar machine of
Government is not the result of the evolution of a political paradigm.
Government is the result of the necessary functional relation between the two
forms of power, sovereignty and government. Thus, Government is, according
to Agamben, the convergence of these two forms of power that are hitherto
distinct: auctoritas and potestas, ordinatio and execution, sovereignty and
execution. The articulation between these two antinomical but functionally
related orders, that is, the ontological and the economical, is Government
(2011b: 1). To put it differently, Government is the structural articulation of
power according to two different levels, aspects, or polarities, because ‘power
– every power … – must hold these two poles together, that is, it must be, at
the same time, kingdom and government, transcendent norm and immanent
order’ (Agamben, 2011b: 82).

As Agamben states when discussing Thomas Aquinas, “‘the economic’ sense
of order … does not concern the substance, but the relation” (Agamben,
2011b: 136). Government is precisely concerned with the relation between
sovereignty and government; Government is the coordination and
articulation of general laws and particular situation. Agamben (2011b: 276)
notes that

- … the real problem – the secret core of politics – is neither sovereignty nor law,
it is government … It is the governmental machine that functions through the
complicated system of relations that binds these two poles together.

This means that Government is not targeting the general or the particular, the
end or the means, but their functional correlation. Government is neither only
substance nor action, but the composition of the gap between the two. This
means that the dominance of administration over legitimacy in modernity is
not the result of replacement of law with bureaucracy, but rather a different
aggregation within the bipolar machine. In the course of history, sometimes
the first pole becomes dominant over the second, and monarchs or legislators
(in the context of nation-state) assume a commanding position over
governments; sometimes the second pole becomes dominant over the first.

Today one could say that the act of government, or execution, has the primacy
over the parliamentary and legislative power. The crisis of legislative power is
evident everywhere. Regardless, Agamben notes, both legislative power and
executive power are here to stay. In fact, one pole can prevail on the other,
like now it is the case for government and executive power, but nevertheless
both poles must be there, otherwise no Government is possible (Agamben,
2011c: n.p.).


==Implications==

For contemporary readers working at the intersection of management and
political theory, Agamben’s contributions summarized in this review may
look irrelevant: Agamben, in fact, offers material to the intellectual history of
politics and to scholarly conceptions of the operations of political power. Yet,
he also instantiates economy and management as absolutely central to the
political discourse. He states that economic concepts are at the origin of
modern political theory. As said, it is a monumental shift from Foucault’s view
of political discourse. For Foucault, within the very same juridical-political
paradigm that sustains the relationship between sovereignty and
government, sovereignty is replaced by government as the dominant form of
power. With modernity, power moves from legitimacy to administration, from
politics to management. Agamben changes it all. First, he states that
Foucault’s main idea, i.e., government has replaced sovereignty as the
dominant form of power, is embodied into, in Agamben’s words, a
theological-political paradigm. This paradigm, which is invisible to scholars
because taken for granted, it is the paradigm of the administration of the city,
i.e., polis. This paradigm becomes visible only after comparison with an
alternative paradigm: the economic-administrative paradigm. This
economic-administrative paradigm, framed in The kingdom and the glory, has
a managerial nature: it is the paradigm of the administration of the house.

What is ‘political’, including the notion of political power, is actually
economical. This last statement drives the reader, in Agamben’s words, to ‘the
vicarious character of the governmental power’ (Agamben, 2011c: n.p.). In
which sense? In the sense that the governmental power is ungrounded, it does
not receive legitimacy from sovereignty. Once again, Agamben finds the roots
of this idea within the theology of the Trinity. In the Trinitarian economy, 
both Father and Son are anarchical; neither has a foundation. This intraTrinitarian relation between the Father and the Son can be considered as the
theological source of the intrinsically vicarious character of governmental
power.

Trinitarian economy is the expression of an anarchical power which moves to
and through the divine persons according to an essentially vicarious paradigm.
There is no way to assign to one person the original foundation of power. Power
has a Trinitarian form; it circulates vicariously in this form. (Agamben, 2011c:
n.p.)

This is why, according to Agamben, the supreme sovereign power in the
history of Western politics presents itself as vicarious. And governmental
power is essentially vicarious, too. The groundlessness of power is the reason
why the fundamental problem of Western public law is to ground: government
in sovereignty, order in law, economical practice in juridical patterns, and
legality in legitimacy (Agamben, 2011c). This is also why in Western public
law the source of power is impossible to describe and moves always in circles
between sovereignty and execution. Agamben notes that ‘the ontology of the
acts of government is a vicarious ontology, in the sense that, within the
economical paradigm, every power has a vicarious character’ (Agamben,
2011b: 141). Power has a vicarious structure, Agamben points out, and moves
in circles. This is the first implication: power has no foundation.

The second implication refers to the relationship between the two poles of
sovereignty and government. The relationship between sovereignty and
government is not political, or juridical; it is economic, or administrative. The
relationship between different orders and forms of power is not related to
obedience (political) or norm (juridical). Thus, a second implication of The
kingdom and the glory is that power is not related to a juridical-political
paradigm, and therefore it does not derive from authority and is not
transferred through norms. Power is related to an administrative activity. In
fact, the relationship between the two poles is driven by voluntary action.
Agamben’s main concern in the first five chapters of The kingdom and the
glory is power and how power works in an economic-administrative paradigm.

For Agamben, power implies not a juridical-political system, but an economy, 
an administration, a management. This makes management all the more
relevant to the political development of the West.


==Government==

For Agamben, power is a form of management, and management operates in
the context of an economic-administrative paradigm. With Agamben’s theses
in mind, management scholars are invited to conduct fresh investigations into
that notion of management. In the final part of this section, I will suggest
some possible investigations, probably the most obvious ones, leaving others
to further, more detailed analysis.

A first line of investigation concerns the origins of management and how
management entered Western consciousness. Agamben’s work suggests a
credible and definitive answer to the origins of management. In a hypothetical
intellectual history of management, it can be said that management was
originally oikonomia, domestic administration. How did management enter
into the great conversation of the West? It entered through economic
theology, and therefore became part of a theological-economic paradigm. In
the context of this paradigm, management was considered an element of an
historical project of salvation. Here, I like to emphasise all three elements of
this definition. Historical: management happens on time, in the flux of time.

It is a project, a work in progress, an activity. More on this later. Finally,
management is framed within an historical project of salvation, i.e., for the
good of the entire community. In sum, management was conceived within a
theological-economic paradigm as a social activity operating in a certain
space at a certain time for the good. Management was not the lunga manus,
the operative branch of an authority. The anarchical character of government,
that is, of management, freed management from any obligation toward
general principles or mandatory norms coming from the reign of ontology or
metaphysics. Management might be part of a plan, but only if autonomously
and voluntarily accepted. Management was not subject to a power, it was itself
a power and eventually worked in coordination with other powers outside a
relationship of subordination. Management was immediately operative,
without need of an external authority. In the beginnings, management did not
belong to a political paradigm, therefore it was not a means for an end. 

Mission of management was not bringing order, separating the useful from
the useless, respecting authority and exercising power, but acting properly in
any situation so that members of the community remain safe or retain
protection. To put it differently, management was an end in itself.

Management stood for operating a constant, permanent activity of caring for
the entire community in the flux of ever-changing historical circumstances.
Management did not belong to the reign of ordo (order, organize, conquer,
command, obey, implement, dispose, etc.) but of salus (taking care, saving,
protecting, etc.).

A second line of investigation focuses on the ontological blue-print of modern
management. Of course, Agamben does not address this topic. However,
management scholars can probably deduct from The kingdom and the
glory that modern management bears the imprint of political theology.
Accordingly, modern management may be located within a juridical-political
paradigm, in which the relationship between sovereignty and government,
authority and execution, is regulated by norm and power. Management
scholars may investigate this link between theological politics and modern
management either to confirm it or reject it. I cannot stop thinking, however,
that this link was established already twenty years ago with regards to social
science. In his ground-breaking book Theology and social theory: Beyond
secular reason, the Anglican theologian John Milbank (2006) claimed that
social science emerged from effectively non-Trinitarian theism, a model of
deity that does not maintain the integrity of the triune God. In other words,
social science emerged from a form of political theology based on the notion
of the sovereign power of a single God. Moreover, Milbank argued that the
secular reason informing and shaping social science is not neutral, but rich
with distorted images of religion. In his view, non-theological disciplines like
sociology and other social sciences maintain religious assumptions that may
not be aligned with orthodox Christianity. Or, as Milbank (2006) famously
said, what scholars encounter in social science is only theology in disguise.
His conclusion seems to validate the hypothesis of political theology as the
legitimate place of origin the modern management. In the remaining part of
this section, I will assume as confirmed the existence of this relationship
between political theology and management.

A third line of investigation regards how management moved from being
incorporated into an economic paradigm to become part of a political
paradigm. In this case, like in the previous one, Agamben cannot be of help
and the entire topic is open to scholarly discussion. However, it is clear that
Agamben’s The kingdom and the glory (or at least the first chapters of the book
considered here), allows management scholars to describe a trajectory in what
can be understood as a semantic shift in academic vocabularies. At the
beginning, management belongs to an economic-administrative paradigm,
then it assumes the tracts of a juridical-political paradigm. Historically, a shift
can be implied at this point, a shift that occurred in the semantic domain of
management. Originally conceived as domestic administration, management
assumed the significance of management of the polis, an organization. When
and why this shift occurred is, of course, open to discussion. Management
scholars are left with the important task of tracing the development of
academic vocabularies through the dynamically shifting cultural, political,
and linguistic landscapes of the twentieth century.

A fourth line of investigation addresses the future of management. Scholars
should be in full speculative mode to dare to answer this question. I propose
three options. First, the future of management will be similar to the present:
management is and will remain in the domain of a juridical-political
paradigm. Scholars will continue their work without further consideration of
Agamben’s work. Second, an economic-administrative paradigm will emerge
as an alternative to the dominant juridical-political paradigm. In this
hypothesis, scholars will be regrouped according to the paradigm of reference.
Third, management will be replaced by technology as an absolutized form of
juridical-political paradigm. In this context, technology is nothing else than
a radical expression of the current juridical-political paradigm.

A fifth and final line of investigation is concerned Agamben’s notion of
management as praxis. Agamben’s thesis of the anarchy of Christ is the
rejection of the classical Greek idea of a substantial link between being and
logos, being and language, being and praxis, action. To put it differently,
action does not need extrinsic justification, government is not based on
authority, and management does not stand on law. The point can be
expanded: politics is an epistemic paradigm, something that is a science, an 
episteme. Economy is a non-epistemic paradigm, something that is not a
science or an episteme. The relationship between different orders of power is
not a science and does not require a form of epistemic knowledge. With
Agamben’s distinction in mind, readers can see the dominance in
management scholarship of a paradigm focused on power and norm over the
economical and the administrative, the transcendence of general laws over
practice, which bases itself on the notion of an oikonomia, an economy
conceived as an immanent order. The emphasis on the juridical, or juridicalpolitical, understood as prescriptive, over the managerial, which treats all of
society, including economic organizations, like a household, has given rise to
the domination of a scientific form of management. Beginning with modern
theory of management – this is the argument – scholarship began to consider
prescription as the central managerial category, reducing practice to
implementation. To put it differently, a prescriptive tendency that culminates
in the theory of management as science has marginalized the alternative
option of management as oikonomia.

Here the work of Henry Mintzberg on the nature of managerial works comes
to mind. It is not enough, however, to signal Mintzberg’s claim on the
pragmatic nature of management. Without tracing the genealogy of
management ideas back to the origins, even marshalling obscure concepts
from Roman law, scholars cannot truly establish the semantic core of what
Mintzberg says, i.e., that management is a kind of practical know-how rather
than a form of rigorous knowledge. This is why Agamben’s work is important.
By investigating Agamben’s study about ‘economy’ and the related notion
of oikonomia, which Mintzberg totally ignores, scholars can make a better
sense of what Mintzberg is saying.

More importantly, management scholars can see in the necessary functional
relation between political theology and oikonomia a model to comprehend the
gulf separating the principle and the implementation, the theory and the
practice, in modern management. Agamben establishes the semantic core of
‘economy’ in the realm of home administration, in which the master does not
force himself on his relatives, but instead works through his/her family
members’ own free choices, which he/she indirectly manipulates to achieve
his/her own ends. This is identical to the way the modern economic 
organizations supposedly work, where all of people’s free choices add up to a
positive outcome due to the intervention of the invisible hand (which is
actually a secularized version of the hand of God, as Agamben argues in the
appendix to The kingdom and the glory). With Agamben’s writings in the
background, management scholars can see how they still operate in a classical
ontological paradigm exemplified in Aristotle, where the relationship
between God and the world is unproblematic. Agamben believes that the
classical ontology expresses itself as a continuum from being to praxis.

However, he sets the economic paradigm in contrast to the classical
ontological paradigm exemplified in Aristotle; in effect, he believes that the
economic paradigm grows out of the breakdown of classical ontology. In fact,
in Agamben’s view, economy belongs to a paradigm different from politics,
and action is not grounded on principle. The perceived fracture between
theology and oikonomia, in other words, between being and acting, is
Agamben’s explanation for free and anarchic praxis. If management scholars
follow Agamben to his final, radical conclusion, management is anarchic (i.e.,
autonomous from theory) practice."


=More information=

'''* Article: [[Power and Management According to Agamben]]: Some implications of Agamben’s thoughts to management scholarship. Enrico Beltramini. Ephemera, volume 20(4), 2020 . Special issue: Work, reconfigured.'''

URL = http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/power-and-management-according-agamben-some-implications-agamben%E2%80%99s-thoughts-management

Contents:

“This article is divided into three parts: first, I briefly introduce Agamben and his work; second, I address Agamben’s work on power; third, I explore the implications of Agamben’s work for management scholars. In the first part, as indispensable background, I introduce briefly Agamben’s overall project and the related notions of state of exception and bare life. I then turn to Agamben’s general assumptions about secularization, his interpretation of Foucault’s work on power, and Agamben’s study of two theological paradigms, one political and the other economic-driven. My central interest does not concern the accuracies or inaccuracies of Agamben’s readings of Foucault’s corpus of political texts. Instead, the intention is to tease out the main features of Agamben’s theoretical and philosophical conceptions of power and management. Then, Government comes to the fore and occupies my focus. Finally, as follow and take further Agamben’s argument, I invite readers to recognize the ramifications of Agamben’s ideas for management scholarship.”

Abstract:

"This review discusses some of the most prominent contributions of Giorgio Agamben to philosophy and political theories that are relevant to management scholars. By addressing Agamben’s theological genealogy of economy and government included in The Kingdom and the Glory, I introduce management scholars to innovative significations and understandings of power and management, including the notion that power is a form of management. I also offer some reflections on the ramifications for management scholarship of Agamben’s engagement with management as a praxis."

(http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/power-and-management-according-agamben-some-implications-agamben%E2%80%99s-thoughts-management )


* "I limit this review to the most influential dimension of Agamben’s work in recent years, specially '''the first five chapters of his The kingdom and the glory''': For a theological genealogy of economy and glory (or simply The kingdom and the glory)." [http://www.ephemerajournal.org/contribution/power-and-management-according-agamben-some-implications-agamben%E2%80%99s-thoughts-management]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]
[[Category:Politics]]
[[Category:Articles]]