
=Bio=

"Agatino Rizzo is senior lecturer of urban and regional planning at University Technology Malaysia as well as member of the Italian Professional Association of Engineers and Planners and the International Society of City and Regional Planners (ISOCARP).

In 2004 Agatino pursued a Master in engineering and architecture and in 2008 he successfully accomplished a PhD in Urban and Regional Planning both at University of Catania (Italy).
From 2006 to 2008 he has been guest researcher at Helsinki University of Technology (Finland), Bauhaus Dessau Foundation (Germany), and Alvar Aalto Foundation (Finland). In 2009 he was Visiting Lecturer at Estonia Academy of Art (EKA) in the frame of the master program in urban studies.

In 2008 Agatino pursued the EU training program in urban studies “FUTURE: Ethnically Diverse City” at Bauhaus-University Weimar. In 2009 he pursued a second EU training program in the frame of “EASY-ECO evaluation of sustainability”.

From 2004 to 2010 he has worked for several private firms to develop concepts for urban renewals, metropolitan strategic plans, and GIS implementation. Agatino has taken part to more than 10 international design competitions.

His main research interests are: metropolitan planning, urban theory, transnational studies, urbanism, and transdisciplinary urban research. From 2008 Agatino is correspondent for the architectural magazine “Compasses” (Dubai)."


=More Information=

CV at this link: http://teknologimalaysia.academia.edu/ATR/CurriculumVitae 

Contact Information: http://agatino.staff.utm.my/ 

[[media:P2PUrbanism definition.pdf| Definition of P2P Urbanism]]


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]