
'''= "From Population to Computing: A Fundamental Shift in Growth Drivers".'''


=Description=

Suyeon Kim:

"Professor Restrepo defines AGI as “a state in which all economically valuable work currently
performed by humans can be accomplished using computational resources.” AGI thus represents
more than technological superiority in specific domains—it marks a critical inflection point where
algorithms and computing power combine to replace production activities across the entire economy.
Restrepo projects that the drivers of economic growth will shift from population expansion and labor
inputs to the rate at which computational resources scale.

This transformation transcends mere technological progress—it constitutes a fundamental economic
restructuring. While industrial-era productivity gains emerged from labor force expansion, AGI-
era growth derives from processing larger datasets and scaling computational capacity. As long as
computational capacity keeps expanding, growth can continue in spite of population decline."

(Taejae Future Consensus Institute <World Research Trend>)


=Characteristics=

Suyeon Kim:

"Five Defining Characteristics of the AGI Economy


According to Restrepo’s analysis, an AGI economy with sufficient computational resources has five
structural features:


==1 Computing Power Becomes the Primary Growth Engine==

Growth originates from computational resources rather than population. Population decline is no longer
a constraint on growth; what matters is the speed at which computational capacity expands. Economic
scale also depends on computational capacity, not raw demographic power.


==2 Wages Shift to Reflect AI Replication Costs==

Wages no longer reflect human productivity but the cost of performing identical work with AI. The
determining question becomes “What would it cost to replace this person with AI?” Human expertise
and experience no longer serve as absolute wage determinants, and even highly refined skills cannot
command a value above the cost ceiling set by AI replication.


==3 Human Labor Concentrates in Supplementary Functions==

Once all bottleneck work is automated, economies become bottleneck-free, and human labor becomes
increasingly concentrated in supplementary domains. Activities that do not directly drive growth—
creativity, caregiving work, or artistic production—become the primary remaining human economic
functions.


==4 Labor’s Share of Income Approaches Zero==

Labor’s share of total income converges toward zero. Wages as a proportion of total economic output
vanish, with wealth concentrated among those who own computational infrastructure. Income
generation shifts from labor to the ownership of computational resources.

For reference, Korea’s 2024 employee compensation ratio (covering wage workers) stood at 67.9%.
While Professor Restrepo’s concept of labor income share encompasses a broader definition that
includes the self-employed, even when wage workers are considered in isolation, the current figure of
approximately 68% would steadily decline toward zero in the AGI era.


==5 The Social Meaning of Work Erodes==

Human work continues, but undergoes a fundamental redefinition. Traditional economics positioned
labor as an avenue for social recognition and self-actualization, but this function progressively
weakens in AGI economies. As the economic value of labor fades, a fundamental question emerges:
What constitutes work in a world where human labor holds diminished value? This moment calls for
a philosophical reexamination of the essence of labor and human identity.

This leads to the interesting paradox that average wages may actually rise in the short term. As AGI
replaces low-value work, human labor becomes increasingly concentrated in comparatively high-value
activities. However, this wage increase fails to offset distributional inequality. While economies expand,
most new wealth flows to those who control computational infrastructure."

(Taejae Future Consensus Institute <World Research Trend>)


=Discussion=

==Three Structural Conflicts from AGI Transition==

Suyeon Kim:

• The Speed Gap: Technology Outpaces Institutional Adaptation

Restrepo’s “algorithm-binding transition”—in which algorithmic breakthroughs trigger immediate
occupational disruptions—is already materializing. Policy frameworks must urgently address the
imbalance between the velocity of technological change and the ability of institutions to adapt. This
requires a fundamental shift—recognizing humans as creators of relational value instead of agents of
production who drive growth.


• The Agency Gap: Economic Concentration Threatens Democratic Balance

Labor’s share of income approaching zero suggests that economic power will become concentrated
among computational resource owners. This concentration threatens democratic decision-making
structures, requiring institutions to recalibrate away from pure efficiency maximization and toward
human-centered values.


• The Identity Crisis: The Collapse of Work-Based Meaning

As Restrepo’s title suggests—”we won’t be missed”—the erosion of work-derived social recognition will
deepen the gaps in how different social strata perceive reality. When humans become less necessary
in production, the only way to achieve social consensus is by redefining human value through
relationships and meaning instead of productivity."

(Taejae Future Consensus Institute] World Trend Research vol42_251121)


==AI Replication Costs Set Wage Ceilings: The AGI Economy Demands a New Social Contract==

Suyeon Kim:

Yale’s Restrepo Mathematically Proves “Economic Growth Without Labor” in his NBER article, “We Won’t Be Missed: Work and Growth in the AGI World”.

This economic realignment fundamentally transforms the determination of wages. Compensation
no longer reflects human productivity but rather the cost of replication—the expense of performing
identical work with artificial intelligence. Any given occupation must prove that it is difficult to replace
with AI in order to retain substantial economic value. Consequently, income increasingly flows to
those who own computational resources rather than those who provide labor.

Professor Restrepo categorizes the multitude of tasks that comprise economic activity into two
fundamental types. “Bottleneck work” refers to critical infrastructure—core tasks that must function
together for the broader system to operate. This kind of work has an interdependent structure in that
economic activity as a whole grinds to a halt if even one bottleneck fails. In contrast, “supplementary
work” occupies a complementary rather than foundational tier. The system operates without it,
although its presence enhances quality of life and societal diversity.

This distinction shapes automation priorities. For economies to grow, the first thing that needs to
improve is bottleneck efficiency. As computational resources expand, societies will increasingly
delegate their most critical functions to AI systems. This includes energy generation, infrastructure
maintenance, and scientific research. Supplementary work—the performing arts, design, or
counseling services—is more likely to remain in human hands since it is not essential for growth.
The critical constraint is that wages in these domains face a structural ceiling. Even where human
labor remains necessary, its economic value cannot exceed the cost of replacing it with AI."

(Taejae Future Consensus Institute] World Trend Research vol42_251121)



==[[ECSA]] proposes [[Fully Distributed Economic Computation ]]==

ECSA:

"Economic systems are fundamentally computational. They operate according to underlying rules: a formal economic logic that inscribes how value is defined, recognized, measured, and coordinated. This shapes their outcomes, limitations, and the economic agency they afford to participants.

Understanding this is the key to guiding their evolution. It reveals that our economic reality is not natural, but human-made. And that, if we want to change it, the place of intervention is the protocols of economic computation.

Economic computation has always been defined by the tools available for its expression. Each new substrate – from clay tablets, to double-entry ledgers, to markets, to platforms, to blockchains – has expanded our economic coordination grammar. This evolution reveals a clear trajectory: the where and how of economic computation is moving toward the network edge. 

In the next step – fully distributed economic computation – all layers of the economic stack – state, computation, value definition, and governance – will be composable at the edge, yet fully interoperable. When economic space agency moves this way outwards to the participants, they no longer are just endpoints submitting transactions to a central logic; they become active computation nodes participating in the definition, calculation, and coordination of value within their specific economic context. This is not just decentralization, it is a new kind of economic intelligence and agency.

But this powerful new agency cannot emerge in a vacuum. It requires a new economic habitat to be architected and built. Networks need a new economic language to act, express, coordinate and evolve: a programmable grammar for defining network value, forming relationships, and coordinating action directly across the network.

As ECSA, we work to enable the emergence of this internet-native economic agency – born in protocol, coordinating via rich interactions, capable of collective economic self-awareness and action. Realizing this requires a cross-disciplinary synthesis of deep research, rigorous engineering, and strategic engagement. We do not only build a protocol, but cultivate the institutional, legal and expressive grounds to push this transformation."

(https://news.ecsa.io/whats-happeni/)

=More information=

* Pascual Restrepo, “We Won’t Be Missed: Work and Growth in the AGI World,” in Ajay K. Agrawal, Anton Korinek, and Erik Brynjolfsson
(eds.), The Economics of Transformative AI (University of Chicago Press, 2025), chap. 9. This research was presented at the NBER “The
Economics of Transformative AI” conference in September 2025, subsequently published as NBER Working Paper No. 34423 in October
of the same year, and is scheduled for inclusion as Chapter 9 in The Economics of Transformative AI to be published by University of
Chicago Press.


[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Labor]]
[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]