== Description==

Agile development is an iterative process that focuses on producing
the highest value in the shortest period of time. Progress is measured
in the form of working software, is inspected often and adapts
quickly. It is a method best used when there is a lack of certainty
around what is valuable and how best to deliver it and / or there are
drastic changes expected in available resources (manpower and budget).
It focuses on revealing options for handling complex dependencies and
interconnectivity between teams and products of different sizes.
 
For the sake of clarity, here are some terms I will be using in the
rest of this document:
 
Customer – The specific team or group that requested the feature or
product.
 
Team Members – The developers, designers and other technically skilled
people creating or implementing the product
 
Story – A short representation of a product feature to be produced.
 
Time Box – A block of time that does not change once set.
 
Iteration – A time box in which forward progress on producing a
product or products is accomplished, normally 1-4 weeks.

=== Principles on which Agile was founded ===

It’s About the People
* Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and support they need and trust them to get the job done.
* Strive for the highest possible levels of collaboration.
* Self-organizing teams produce the best architectures, requirements and designs.
 
Transparency
* Aspects of the process that affect the outcome must be visible to those managing the outcome.
* When someone inspecting a process believes that something is done, it must be equivalent to his or her definition of done (no sacrifices).
 
Inspection
* The process must be inspected frequently enough as to detect unacceptable variances in the process.
* The frequency of inspection cannot impact the ability to meet delivery.
* Success is directly related to the skill and diligence of the people inspecting the results.
 
Adaption
* The inspector must alter the process or material being processed if he or she finds that part of the process is outside acceptable limits or will result in an unacceptable product.
* The adjustment must be made as quickly as possible to minimize further deviation. Continuous attention to technical excellence and good design enhances agility.
 
Value
* The highest priority is to satisfy the customer throughout development.
* Frequent iterations ensure product quality early in the product lifecycle.
* Customer receives value as early as the completion of the first iteration.
 
Change is Good
* Requirement changes, even late in development, are welcome and provide competitive advantage.
* Customers and developers work together, sometimes daily throughout the project
 
Simplicity
* Maximize the amount of work NOT done.
 
=== The Process ===

Each team has a team lead / project manager, product owner, team
members and backlog of stories. Team members should be chosen with
cross-functionality in mind, meaning one team can perform the design,
coding and infrastructural requirements of the stories selected. The
product owner is a chosen by the customer(s) to be their
representative on the team and does not perform any development. The
team plans, sizes, manages and executes it’s own backlog.
 
Each project is comprised of multiple releases, each of which can
contain multiple iterations. Stories are started and completed inside
of a single iteration. The stories that are tackled first are chosen
based on value and priority.

==== The Customer’s Process ====
 
The customer is responsible for the vision of the project and
products. This is usually done with the support / moderation of a
project manager and is accomplished in two stages.
 
The first stage, project setup is where the team is built and the
customer’s vision is formulated. The individual goals or details are
not as important as the overall message. Teams members should be
trained, so that they can understand the process by which the project
will be developed. By the end of this stage, preliminary release
goals, feature lists and risks should be identified. This stage can be
done after a project has been started and will go quicker then normal
in this case.
 
The second stage is the product development. This relies heavily on
the whole team and should result in iterative development grouped into
meaningful product releases. During this and all future points in
time, the customer retains exclusive control over the release’s
content and objectives.
 
==== The Team’s Process ====
 
The team starts with a high-level conversation about feature
requirements, avoiding technical language. Feature requirements are
then broken up into stories that can be stated in the following
format:
 
 As a <type of user>
 I want to be able to <some goal>
 So that <some result>

(Flash cards work really well for this)
 
The product owner then places a priority on the story (the team
members usually have no say in this) and the team members give the
story a rough size estimate (the product owner has no say in this). It
is important that everyone on the team realizes that both priority and
size are expected to change throughout the project. The story is then
placed in the product backlog. None of these steps need to be perfect
or complete for the story to be placed in the backlog, though each
story should describe something that provides value to the users of
the product.
 
Good stories follow the I.N.V.E.S.T. principle:

* Independent
* Negotiable
* Valuable
* Estimable
* Small
* Testable
 
NOTE: Stories are used because they shift focus from written to verbal
communication. They avoid the need to put everything in writing up
front and are written in a way that anyone can understand. Their
brevity avoids implementation detail and technobabble before it is
necessary. Stories can be thought of as the promise of a future
conversation.
 
Once the backlog has a decent number of stories in it, the first
iteration can be planned. Each iteration starts with a planning
meeting and ends with a retrospective meeting. Every story undertaken
in each iteration should be started and completed during that
iteration. A story is not considered complete until it has been
elaborated upon, designed, developed, tested and accepted by the
product owner.
 
The planning meeting begins by selecting the stories with the highest
priority to size ratio and prepping them for movement into the
iteration backlog by adding a short statement of completion. The team
members then identify tasks that will need to be completed within each
story and estimate each task in hours. Once the iteration time box is
full, no additional stories are added to the backlog.
 
Each story now reads as follows:
 
 As a _______________
 I want to be able to ________________
 So that _________________

I will know this is done when <completion criteria>.
 
To implement this:
# Task 1 (<N> hours)
# Task 2 (<N> hours)
# …
 
NOTE: It is important that iterations are not planned around specific
functional activities (ex. A design iteration, followed by a
development iteration, followed by a testing iteration, etc., etc.).
 
While the iteration is under way, stories should be worked until
completion and re-estimated daily with new tasks added as they are
discovered. The number of stories in progress should be kept to the
absolute minimum as to avoid incomplete stories at the end of the
iteration.
 
Details about the stories emerge during the iteration, not during the
initial discussion periods. The product owner, and no one else, is
responsible for determining the acceptance criteria, a set of high-
level conditions the story must fulfill. The team members determine
the technical details of the implementation throughout the process.
 
During development, there is a short (15 minute or less) daily meeting
involving all of the team members, called a standup meeting. These
meetings serve as quick status updates for the team lead and address
the following questions with each team member (adjusted for time of
day):
 
* What did I work on yesterday?
* What am I going to work on today?
* What are the obstacles / issues I have encountered?
 
The standup meetings are not for issue resolution. If someone else on
the team has a solution to a raised issue, they should connect with
the team member experiencing the issue after the standup as to not
hold everyone else on the team up. The product owner is usually not
involved in these meetings and is not allowed to comment on the
answers to the questions if he or she is. This is a status meeting
only.
 
During the course of the iteration, a burn down chart is managed by
the team lead. This is a simple two-axis graph with hours on the
vertical axis and days on the horizontal. Each day, the graph is
updated by looking at the remaining hours of all incomplete tasks,
giving an instant snapshot of how on target the iteration is. Based on
the result of this chart, stories can be added or removed, but the
time of the iteration cannot be changed.
 
At the end of the iteration there is a retrospective meeting in which
the team evaluates their performance and presents their work to the
customer. Goals of the iteration are reviewed and feedback is invited.
The main goals of the retrospective are to improve accuracy in the
next iteration, update the product backlog and update the product
release plan. Each team member should address the following three
questions:
 
* What did we do well?
* What did we not do well?
* What are we going to improve in the next iteration?
 
Discussion among the team and the customer is actively encouraged
during this meeting. At the end of the retrospective, a new iteration
begins.

===In Summary===
 
Agile development focuses on producing a stable and functional product
in an unstable and uncertain environment. By focusing on the planning
instead of the specific plan, accuracy and precision can be improved
over time and a project can easily adapt to changing requirements.
Customers are free to manage the product while each team member
focuses on their area of expertise.

== More Information ==
* [[Agile Manifesto]]
* [[Agile Development]]
* [[Agile Learning Centers]]
* [[Agile Software Development]]
* [[Eric Bear on Agile Learning Centers]]

* [[Sociocracy 3.0]]

* [https://www.apm.org.uk/resources/find-a-resource/agile-project-management/ Agile project management]
* [https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101/ What is Agile?] from the Agile Alliance

[[Category:Technology]]