'''= "Agnotology is the study of wilful acts to spread confusion and deceit, usually to sell a product or win favour".''' [http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20160105-the-man-who-studies-the-spread-of-ignorance]


=Description=

'''1.'''

(Robert) "Proctor had found that the cigarette industry did not want consumers to know the harms of its product, and it spent billions obscuring the facts of the health effects of smoking. This search led him to create a word for the study of deliberate propagation of ignorance: agnotology.

It comes from agnosis, the neoclassical Greek word for ignorance or ‘not knowing’, and ontology, the branch of metaphysics which deals with the nature of being. Agnotology is the study of wilful acts to spread confusion and deceit, usually to sell a product or win favour.

“I was exploring how powerful industries could promote ignorance to sell their wares. Ignorance is power… and agnotology is about the deliberate creation of ignorance.

“In looking into agnotology, I discovered the secret world of classified science, and thought historians should be giving this more attention.”

(http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20160105-the-man-who-studies-the-spread-of-ignorance)



'''2. Danah Boyd:'''

"what if ignorance is strategically manufactured? What if the tools of knowledge production are perverted to enable ignorance? In 1995, Robert Proctor and Iain Boal coined the term “agnotology” to describe the strategic and purposeful production of ignorance. In an edited volume called Agnotology, Proctor and Londa Schiebinger collect essays detailing how agnotology is achieved. Whether we’re talking about the erasure of history or the undoing of scientific knowledge, agnotology is a tool of oppression by the powerful."

(https://points.datasociety.net/agnotology-and-epistemological-fragmentation-56aa3c509c6b?)

[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Encyclopedia]]
[[Category:Media]]