
'''= "pairs whose opposite behavior patterns are, paradoxically, a form of collaboration ...  systems that are cooperating (agonistically) by acting in opposition (antagonistically)".''' [https://www.annales.org/re/2023/re111/2023-07-03.pdf]


=Description=

François and Mireile RODDIER :

"Coupling of cycles in opposite phases of expansion and recession – pairs whose opposite behavior patterns are, paradoxically, a form of collaboration. For example, imagine riding a bicycle at a fast pace: it’s easy enough to imagine that your speed can be maintained using only one pedal. Now if you are faced with a hill, you will have recourse to the second pedal in order to avoid falling over. In the same way, the 2CV Citroën sets its two cylinders in opposite phases of expansion and compression. The biologist Élie Bernard-Weil called these Ago-Antagonistic Systems – referring to systems that are cooperating (agonistically) by acting in opposition (antagonistically) ... Biologists have observed the ubiquity of ago-antagonistic mechanisms in nature. These binary systems monitor and regulate our energy dissipation. Think of our bodies: glucose (sugar) is one of our principal sources of energy. Our pancreas produces both insulin and glucagon, respectively reducing or increasing our sugar levels as needed, since both surplus and shortage can be lethal. Our system also distinguishes two separate nervous systems, the sympathetic and parasympathetic. One sustains our need for activity (flight or fight), the other for rest. Together, they maintain a tight equilibrium midway between workaholism and chronic fatigue – both on the rise in high energy consuming societies."

(https://www.annales.org/re/2023/re111/2023-07-03.pdf)


[[Category:Complexity]]

[[Category:Complexity]]