'''= "ABO 1.0 is the first community-building framework which fully supports our personal autonomy and the integrity of interpersonal agreements".'''

URL = [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1c_xWEIay-2jyJ3Rqb6OgTxoZBJfjNW4d6w6ukXyeJk4/edit?usp=sharing]


== Description ==

'''1. Greg Cassel et al.:'''

An "Agreement-based organization is '''an intentionally minimal framework of suggested protocols.  It's a framework for generating bespoke or 'made-to-order' formal, consent-based relationships in all domains''': within groups, between groups, between individuals and groups, and peer-to-peer.  It’s a framework for developing exploratory discussion and media-sharing networks, as well as objectives-driven economic agreements and commitments." 
([https://docs.google.com/document/d/1c_xWEIay-2jyJ3Rqb6OgTxoZBJfjNW4d6w6ukXyeJk4/edit])

'''2. Greg Cassel:'''

"As peer-to-peer technologies evolve, it seems increasingly urgent and feasible for humanity to move towards a norm of [[Consent-Based Relationships]]. We can incrementally re-imagine and rebuild patterns of behavior which have been dehumanized by ages of violence and centuries of commercially industrialized culture. We can undermine distorted fears and false scarcities, to co-create an information age which is rich in freedom and opportunities for all. Compared to [[Consent-Oriented Organizational Models]] such as [[Sociocracy]] and [[Holacracy]], ABO 1.0 is a deliberately minimal framework for generating consent-based agreements. I distinguish this developmental framework from suggested ‘recipes’ for community management, which can and IMO should be developed and explored both separately and together with this.
ABO 1.0 is a conceptually dense thirteen page document."
(https://medium.com/enspiral-tales/a-developmental-framework-for-agreement-based-organization-54298b128906#.tfilpcwat)

== Characteristics ==

Greg Cassel:

"
* All formal social structures are based on written agreements adopted by the direct consent of each agreement’s members. Agreements are created using the agree/disagree/abstain/block voting model as developed by Loomio for online use.
* Agreements of all sorts are supported, but the peer-based management of ‘agreement-based groups’ is stressed. For instance, practical standards are suggested for dealing with uncooperative members and emergency situations.
* Privacy and permissions are fundamentally important.
* Potential agreements are systematically related to creative and economic intentions including goals, processes, tasks, roles, events, standards, and budgets. Special consideration is given to sustainable collective budgeting.
* Special consideration is also given to the delegation of group tasks and roles, in the spirit of Jo Freeman’s extraordinarily forward-looking The Tyranny of Structurelessness.
* Complexly-related agreements are suggested through modular design, hierarchy, federation, ‘intercommunity’ and distributed version control."
(https://medium.com/enspiral-tales/a-developmental-framework-for-agreement-based-organization-54298b128906#.tfilpcwat)


== More Information ==

* [[Agreements]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:Open_Company_Formats]]
[[Category:P2P_Law]]