
=Directory=

===Farm Hack Related===
* http://www.virtualgrange.org/
* http://nefke.nesawg.org/
* http://www.farmtoinstitution.org/
* http://www.regrarians.org/
* http://www.polyfacefarms.com/
* http://savory.global/
* http://www.newforestfarm.net/

===New York Related===

[http://eastnewyorkfarms.org East New York Farms]

[http://www.urbandesignlab.columbia.edu/?pid=nyc_foodshed The New York City Regional Foodshed Initiative] expands the preliminary analysis of the regional capacity to produce food and involves an in-depth examination of the local food production capacity of the New York City Metropolitan Region. 

[http://www.foodsystemsnyc.org/ Food Systems NYC] is a membership based organization designed to foster communication and cultivate community amongst various stake holders and professionals working across the food system.

[http://www.foodsystemsnyc.org/resources Food Systems Network NYC] has compiled a list of online resources for finding quality local cooking ingredients, eating out at local, farmer-friendly restaurants, getting involved in community gardening, and finding tools, resources, and support for becoming involved in food systems work.

[http://www.stonebarnscenter.org/ Stone Barns Center for Food and Agriculture] is a non-profit farm and education center located just 25 miles north of Manhattan in Pocantico Hills, New York. Stone Barns operates an 80-acre four-season farm and is working on broader initiatives to create a healthy and sustainable food system. Through our Growing Farmers Initiative, children’s education programs, and diverse public awareness programs, we aim to improve the way America eats and farms.

[http://www.holtonfarms.com/index.html Holton Farms] is a CSA aggregator that delivers Vermont produce to consumers in New York City.

===Food Deserts===

[http://www.projectfresh.msu.edu/ Project FRESH] is an educational program providing participants with coupons to purchase locally grown fresh fruits and vegetables at participating farmer’s markets.

===Land Trusts===

http://www.pccfarmlandtrust.org/

http://agrariantrust.org/

===Disintermediation===

http://www.plovgh.com/

http://orfoodex.com/

http://www.farmigo.com/

http://www.localfoodsystems.org/

[http://www.farmbridge.org/ FarmBridge] wants to "provide free software that will help the local foods movement grow!"

http://www.landshare.org

===Agricultural Technologies===

[http://eggzy.net/ Eggzy] "manage your backyard chickens online."

http://farmhack.net/home/

http://opensourceecology.org/

http://www.versaland.com/about/

http://theurbanfarmingguys.com/

===Community Organizing===

[http://www.neofoodweb.org/home North East Ohio Food Web] is a local food action group in NE Ohio.

"[http://www.youngfarmers.org/ The National Young Farmers' Coalition] is a new organization, created by and for young and beginning farmers in the United States."  Their [http://www.youngfarmers.org/practical/farm-hack/ Farm Hack] Project is "a resource for farmers who embrace the long-standing farm traditions of tinkering, inventing, fabricating, tweaking, and fixing things that they broke."

[http://wannafarm.com/earthway-seeder-fix/ Wanna Farm] is a blog from [http://bluefoxorganics.com/ Blue Fox Farm] in Southern Oregon.  "One of the things that will help us maintain farmers is by being innovative and creative in creating our farming systems.  Hope the info here can contribute to that.  Email me at wannafarm [at] gmail [dawt] com"

[http://www.thegreenhorns.net/ The Greenhorns] is a documentary/community about the emerging young farmer's movement.  Here's their [http://thegreenhorns.wordpress.com/ blog].

"[http://www.youngfarmers.org/ The National Young Farmers' Coalition] is a new organization, created by and for young and beginning farmers in the United States."  Their [http://www.youngfarmers.org/practical/farm-hack/ Farm Hack] Project is "a resource for farmers who embrace the long-standing farm traditions of tinkering, inventing, fabricating, tweaking, and fixing things that they broke."

===Agricultural Research===

[http://www.landinstitute.org The Land Institute] is a cutting edge, science-based organization that promotes an alternative to current destructive agricultural practices. Our work is dedicated to advancing perennial grain crops and polyculture farming solutions.

[http://www.theplantlist.org/ The Plant List] is a working list of all known plant species.

[http://southwestfarmpress.com/management/fuel-food-energy-use-us-food-system?page=1 Fuel for food — energy use in the U.S. food system]

===Coops===
http://www.farmers.coop/


[[Category: Sarapis]]
[[Category: Agrifood]]
[[Category: Ecology]]