'''* Report: Commons Agroecology Report. Michelle Grant. MSc in Sustainable Food and Natural Resources at the Centre for Alternative Technology in Wales / Stroud Commons, 2024.'''

URL = https://cms.lowimpact.org/wp-content/uploads/CommonsAgroecology_Report.pdf


=Description=

Stroud Commons:

"There’s huge overlap between the principles of agroecology and of commoning, and growth in the commons movement could mean a shift towards agroecology and away from damaging industrial agriculture, as there would be more access to land for small, organic farmers."


Michelle Grant (from the conclusion):

"In order to transform food systems in the UK, a radical dismantling of the dominant narrative of private property ownership is fundamental to allow access to land for agroecological farming, especially for small-scale producers and new entrants. Globalised, industrial agriculture is failing to meet the nutritional, social and cultural needs of millions of people worldwide, contributing to environmental systems breakdown. This report has shown that bringing land into common stewardship via a new Land Commons, supported by measures implemented by the state at both local and national level could lead to transformational change in the food and farming sector in England, reducing inequality, improving wealth distribution and access, and protecting and enhancing wellbeing and biodiversity.

There is a wealth of both academic and grey literature on the history of the commons, and many examples in literature and in practice of modern commons projects in most spheres, ranging from co-operative farming to credit commons. The new Land Commons proposed by this report is emergent, so although there is extensive literature on other types of commons and their implementations there is little as yet in this area.

Further research, data collection and impact analysis will be necessary to chart the development of a new Land Commons following proposals by the Stroud Commons group, especially regarding the novel application of its economic model, funding the first land purchases, and the development of community agreements and peer governance, to create a transparent model for replication. Continuing empirical research is necessary to support the understanding of agroecological farming and its co-benefits, and how access to land in England is vital to allow it to flourish."


=Discussion=

==[[Towards New Land Commons in the UK]]==

Michelle Grant:

"Bringing land back into community stewardship via an interstitial commons parallel to, or
symbiotically with the state (Ryan, 2013) would be a fundamental step forward in providing access
to land for agroecology.

Private property rules rely on alienability – the right to sell land – in a market that favours large,
often institutional investors, based on purchasing power and potential profit, excluding many on
the basis of wealth, class, gender and race (Oldham, 2022). Speculative inflation, due to location
desirability rather than improvements to the land or its dwellings, has caused land values to
increase exponentially, with no penalty for leaving land idle, housing empty, or use-change from
agricultural to residential (Monbiot et al., 2019).

'''A new Land Commons would utilise a mutual credit mechanism (a collaborative credit accounting
framework) (Slater and Jenkin, 2016; Fleischman et al., 2020), to buy parcels of land without
accruing debt by selling inflation-proof vouchers (Mutual Credit Services, no date) denominated in
land area, at a discount to investors.''' 

'''Inalienable, with strong asset locks, the land would be under Land Commons stewardship and rented to tenants (also Commoners), who would pay for rights to use the land in a way that supports and expands the vision of the Commons.''' Vouchers could be
sold by investors, including to tenants, to realise a return on investment (Darby, 2023; Green,
2023).

Overlapping, small-scale usage Rights and Responsibilities would be decided upon by all
Commoners, potentially varying between locations, creating a land use ecosystem with
Commoners’ responsibilities to the land and each other forming strong material interdependence,
a resilient, meaningful basis for communities to build adaptive capacity (Green, 2023).
A new Land Commons would be nimble, with legal and regulatory mechanisms developed to work
within the parameters of the capitalist paradigm in a minimal way - legally viable, difficult to
subvert by legislative change, and allowing non-essential decisions to be developed democratically
by and between Commoners (Green, 2023).

A diversity of peer governance approaches will likely be necessary (Green, 2023), and could
include Sociocracy – nested, circular groups with double linking for multi-directional networking
(several members existing in both smaller and main groups), and decision-making by consent
(Owen and Buck, 2020); deliberative democracy – a mode of citizen engagement valuing the
process of collective decisions made by and for citizens, with outcomes for the common good
(Flinders and Curry, 2008); and an evolving, recursive organisational form responding when
needed to structural transition in the direction of its vision and according to its ethics (Green,
2023).

The Land Commons would be nested in a larger Commons socio-economic system (Wall, 2017),
and could be federated horizontally with Commons in other locations, each group retaining its
autonomy but enabling sharing of knowledge, and the ability to trade (Darby, 2023).


'''* Enabling factors:'''

There are a multitude of enabling factors that could facilitate the flourishing of a new Land
Commons.

Better support for planning officials to understand agroecological farming, and when living on-site
is essential, could enable small-scale farmers to create viable enterprises within strict ecological
guidelines, following Wales’ One Planet Development Policy (Wach, 2017). Developing locally
relevant plans with councils could release land for agroecology (Wach, 2017), and saving or recreating County Farms could provide equitable access (Monbiot et al., 2019). A new Land
Commons working with grassroots movements such as Land In Our Names on justice and
reparations could increase access for racialised groups (Wach, 2023).

Stopping use-change of agricultural buildings by removing Class Q Permitted Development Rights
would protect agricultural ties (Monbiot et al., 2019). Large landholders could be encouraged to
release a percentage of land to create affordable smallholdings (CPRE, 2016). Subsidies that lock
out small-scale farmers leading to consolidation and increasing speculative accumulation could be
revised (Monbiot et al., 2019). Working with government could open a pathway to the state being
a symbiotic contributor by adjusting policies, rather than an arbitrator (Russell et al., 2023).
Pre-emptive Community Right to Buy could unlock tracts of land from entrenched ownership
patterns and challenge power dynamics (Calo et al., 2023). In Scotland, this has been strengthened
to allow communities to buy unused properties or land for sustainable development, even when it
isn’t market available (Wach, 2023), and could be further supported by Compulsory Sale Orders
(Pollard, 2018).

Increased gift or estate taxes could stop land automatically passing down to children upon death
(Smaje, 2020), and a Land Value Tax, proposed by many as a solution to speculation, would
discourage land from being left idle, encouraging improvement or circulation back into the
market, lowering land prices and reducing inequalities (Wightman, 2013).

Implementing a new Land Commons and creating collective agreements within inherently social
relationships will be complicated and challenging, with a high level of energy required to maintain
them given the need for ongoing and majority consent (Smaje, 2020). As an iterative process there
will be constant adjustments, as the Commons adapts to new patterns and events. Building and
maintaining a common resource runs counter to capitalist investment culture, and there may be
attempts to re-enclose or co-opt it (Green, 2023), and attempts to subvert its decentralising force
through media, regulation, and taxes. Starting locally then federating horizontally could ensure
Commons groups are harder to attack and disable (Darby, 2023).

Commoning is a transformational process, with a long-term agenda of emergence and systems
change beginning at a local, relational level using novel mechanisms (Green, 2023). Like
agroecology, it promotes life within the earth’s carrying capacity, tackling growth feedback loops
that exacerbate social and ecological crises (Bollier and Helfrich, 2019), with the potential to
accelerate rapidly through replication (Green, 2023). It nests humans in a larger whole, allowing
meaningful relationships and co-creation that transcend ideological binaries (Bollier and Helfrich,
2019; Green, 2023), fostering resilience and organisational skills that can help communities
weather crisis and disruption (Darby, 2023)."

(https://cms.lowimpact.org/wp-content/uploads/CommonsAgroecology_Report.pdf)


=More information=

==Bibliography==

A selection from the References:


Anderson, C. and Anderson, M. (2020) ‘Resources to Inspire a Transformative Agroecology: A Curated Guide.’,
Transformation of our Food Systems. Lukunftsstiftung Landwirtschaft/Biovision.

Calo, A., Shields, K. and Iles, A. (2023) ‘Using property law to expand agroecology: Scotland’s land reforms based on
human rights’, The Journal of Peasant Studies, 50(5), pp. 2075–2111. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2022.2083506.

Cox, M., Arnold, G. and Villamayor Tomás, S. (2010) ‘A Review of Design Principles for Community-based Natural
Resource Management’, Ecology and Society, 15(4). Available at: https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-03704-150438.
CPRE (2016) 'New model farming'. Available at: https://www.cpre.org.uk/resources/new-model-farming/ (Accessed:
31 December 2023).

Green, D. (2023) Personal Communication (16/11/2023 – 02/01/2024)
HLPE (2019) ‘Agroecological and other innovative approaches for sustainable agriculture and food systems that
enhance food security and nutrition. A report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the
Committee on World Food Security, Rome’, Committee on World Food Security. Available at:
https://www.fao.org/cfs/cfs-hlpe/publications/hlpe-14 (Accessed: 4 October 2023)

IPCC (2019) ‘Climate Change and Land: An IPCC Special Report’, Climate Change and Land: An IPCC Special Report on
Climate Change, Desertification, Land Degradation, Sustainable Land Management, Food Security, and Greenhouse
Gas Fluxes in Terrestrial Ecosystems, 1–864. Available at: https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/ (Accessed: 31 December 2023)

Monbiot, G. et al. (2019) Land for the Many: A report to Labour. Available at: https://landforthemany.uk/ (Accessed: 2
January 2024).

Nourish Scotland (2017) Wanted: Land for New Farmers. Available at: https://www.nourishscotland.org/wpcontent/uploads/2017/04/Wanted-Land-For-New-Farmers.pdf (Accessed: 30 December 2023).

Oldham, O. (2022) ‘Is private property a barrier to food system transformation?’, Medium, 10 October. Available at:
https://oliviaoldham.medium.com/is-private-property-a-barrier-to-food-system-transformation-5d940ba07778
(Accessed: 15 December 2023).

Rodgers, C.P. et al. (2010) Contested Common Land: Environmental Governance Past and Present. London, UNITED
KINGDOM: Taylor & Francis Group. Available at:
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ljmu/detail.action?docID=605283 (Accessed: 11 December 2023).

Shrubsole, G. (2019) Who owns England? How we lost our green and pleasant land, and how to take it back. William
Collins.

Smaje, C. (2020) A Small Farm Future. Chelsea Green Publishing.

Wach, E. (2017) 'Why Access to Land is Vital for Sustainable, Healthy and Fair Food Systems: Strategies for Increasing
Access to Land for Agroecological Farming', Institute of Development Studies. Available at:
https://www.ids.ac.uk/publications/why-access-to-land-is-vital-for-sustainable-healthy-and-fair-food-systemsstrategies-for-increasing-access-to-land-for-agroecological-farming/ (Accessed: 2 January 2024).

Wach, E. (2023) How could land in England be reformed for the commons?, Institute of Development Studies. Available
at: https://www.ids.ac.uk/opinions/how-could-land-in-england-be-reformed-for-the-commons/ (Accessed: 12
December 2023).

Wightman, A. (2013) 'A Land Value Tax for England – Fair, Efficient, Sustainable’, Land Matters, 11 March. Available at:
http://www.andywightman.com/archives/2351 (Accessed: 2 January 2024).

Winchester, A.J.L. (2022) Common Land in Britain: A History from the Middle Ages to the Present Day. Boydell &
Brewer.


===On [[Mutual Credit-Based Financing]]===

Fleischman, T., Dini, P. and Littera, G. (2020) ‘Liquidity-Saving through Obligation-Clearing and Mutual Credit: An
Effective Monetary Innovation for SMEs in Times of Crisis’, Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 13(12), p. 295.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/jrfm13120295.

Mutual Credit Services (no date) 'Use-Credit Obligations'. Available at: https://www.mutualcredit.services/use-creditobligations (Accessed: 2 January 2024).

Slater, M. and Jenkin, T. (2016) ‘The Credit Commons: A Money for the Solidarity Economy’. Available at:
http://www.creditcommons.net/assets/credit-commons.pdf (Accessed: 15 December 2023)

[[Category:UK]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Commons]]
[[Category:Commons_Infrastructure]]
[[Category:Commons_Policy]]