=Discussion=

Pierre Levy:

"By its very name, Artificial
Intelligence naturally evokes the
idea of an autonomous machine
intelligence that confronts human
intelligence, to simulate or surpass
it. But if we look at the real uses
of Artificial Intelligence devices, it
becomes clear that, in most cases,
they augment, assist or accompany
the operations of human intelligence.

Back in the era of expert systems
– during the 1980s and 1990s – I
observed that the critical knowledge
of experts within an organization,
once codified in the form of rules
that animate knowledge bases, could
be made available to the members
who needed it most, responding
precisely to current situations and
always being available. Rather than
supposedly autonomous Artificial
Intelligences, these were means
for the dissemination of practical
knowledge, the main effect of
which was to increase the collective
intelligence of user communities.

In the current phase of AI
development, the role of the
expert is played by the crowds that
produce the data, and the role of
the cognitive engineer, who codifies
the knowledge, is played by neural
networks. Instead of asking linguists
how to translate, or recognized
authors how to produce a text,
statistical models unconsciously ask
the multitudes of anonymous editors
on the web and automatically extract
patterns of patterns that no human
programmer could have clarified. 

Conditioned by their training, 
the algorithms can then recognize and
reproduce data corresponding to the
forms they have learned. But because
they abstract structures rather than
recording everything, they are able
to correctly conceptualize forms (of
images, texts, music, code, etc.) that
they have never encountered before,
and to produce an infinite number
of new symbolic arrangements.
This is why we speak of generative
Artificial Intelligence. Far from
being autonomous, this AI extends
and amplifies collective intelligence.
Millions of users contribute to the
improvement of the models by
asking questions and commenting
on the answers they receive. We can
take the example of Midjourney
(which generates images), whose users
exchange instructions (promptly)
and constantly improve their skills.
Midjourney’s Discord servers are
now the most populous on the
planet, with over a million users. A
new stigmergic collective intelligence
is emerging from the fusion of social
media, AI, and creator communities.
Behind the “machine” we must
glimpse the collective intelligence it
reifies and mobilizes.
AI offers us new access to the world’s
digital memory. It is also a way of
mobilizing that memory to automate
increasingly complex symbolic
operations, involving the interaction
of heterogeneous semantic universes
and accounting systems.

I do not believe for a second that the
work is done. Automation is making
certain professions disappear and
giving rise to new ones. There are
no more blacksmiths, but mechanics
have replaced them. Water carriers
have given way to plumbers. The
complexity of society increases the
number of problems to be solved.
“Smart” machines increase cognitive
work, automating what can be
automated. There will always be a 
need for intelligent, creative and
compassionate people, but they will
have to learn to work with new tools."

(https://www.pucpress.com.br/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/CADERNOS_DO_CONTEMPORANEO_0000_P.pdf)


==The [[Flynn Effect]]: Is There a Lowering of Cognitive Capacity Due to AI or Digital Technology==

Q by Fabiano Incerti and Douglas Borges Candido 

- "Some authors talk about the
reversal of the “Flynn effect”,
suggesting that future generations
will have a lower cognitive level
than their parents. How do you
see this issue in the context
of emerging technologies? Do
you think that the intensive
use of digital technologies can
contribute to this trend or do they
offer new ways to expand our
cognitive capacities?


Pierre Levy:

The decline in cognitive (and
moral) levels has been deplored
for centuries by each generation,
while the “Flynn effect” shows
precisely the opposite. It is normal
to see a stabilization of Intelligence
Quotient (IQ) values: the hope of
a constant increase is never very
realistic and it would be normal to
reach a limit or a plateau, as in any
other historical or even biological
phenomenon. But let us admit that
today’s young people have lower
IQ scores than the immediately
preceding generations. We must
first ask ourselves what these
tests measure: primarily academic
intelligence. They do not take into
account emotional intelligence,
relational intelligence, aesthetic
sensitivity, physical or technical
skills, or even practical common
sense. So we are not measuring
something limited here. On the other
hand, if we focus on the adaptation
to school functioning that IQ tests
measure, why blame technology
first? Perhaps families are resigned
to the task of education (particularly
because families are falling apart), or
schools and universities are failing,
becoming increasingly lax (because
students have become customers to
be satisfied at any price). When I was
a student, an “A” in exams was
not yet a right… Today, it has almost
become a pure and simple substitute
for human intellectual activity.
Finally, and this needs to be repeated
constantly, “the use of digital
technologies” does not make much
sense. There are uses that are mindnumbing, which slide down the slope
of intellectual laziness, and uses that
open the mind but require personal
responsibility, an effort of autonomy
and – yes – work. It is the role of
educators to encourage positive uses."

(https://www.pucpress.com.br/wp-content/uploads/2025/05/CADERNOS_DO_CONTEMPORANEO_0000_P.pdf)


[[Intelligence]]

[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]