<big><big>'''Air''' to breathe</big></big>

What is the source of abundant, clean air? Why is the air not always clear? And how can we make sure that it is as clean as possible?


== Context within NORA ==

=== Related resource ===

'''[[Air and Atmosphere]]'''
The resource of clean air requires no further transformation in order to be directly usable for us and for all other organisms. Therefore, the Resources pages on the air and atmosphere are sufficient to cover this need.

=== Relationships to other needs ===

Without air to breathe, we die within a minute. Other organisms likewise die if deprived of air. Hence, air to breathe is a fundamental need, without which no other needs can be met.

“Physical and mental '''[[Health|health]]''', and access to appropriate care in the case of illness or disability.”

Polluted air, and reduced protection from the sun's UV radiation if stratospheric ozone gets depleted, affect our ability to meet other needs. Most importantly, we become unhealthy, and will need more medical care in order to compensate for the ill effects.


“'''Security''' from bodily, emotional, and mental harm; this includes security when one cannot take care of oneself (e.g., in infancy and childhood, in old age, or due to illness or disability).”

In severe cases, air pollution may affect our bodily security. 


“Clean '''[[water]]''' to drink, for hygiene, for cooking and other household purposes.”

Pollution may move from air to water or vice versa; hence clean air and water are related. 



Increased levels of greenhouse gases are likely to have numerous environmental impacts, which affect numerous human as well as animal and plant needs:


“Sufficient and nutritious '''[[food]]''', appropriate to one’s cultural preferences and taste”

Food production will be disrupted in numerous places due to climate change (especially where the frequency of droughts increases).


“[[Being at Home|Being at '''home''']] in the place where one lives”

Animal and plant habitats will decline in extent or in quality; people accustomed to ways of life adapted to the local climate will be forced to change, against their wills.


“'''Security''' from bodily, emotional, and mental harm; this includes security when one cannot take care of oneself (e.g., in infancy and childhood, in old age, or due to illness or disability).”

Global warming is likely to lead to increased frequency of hurricanes and other extreme events (e.g., glacial lake outbursts) that can put people at risk, while also leading to sea level rise that exposes coastal people around the world to greater hazards.


“'''Shelter/housing''' appropriate to one’s cultural and individual preferences, and the climate”

With changing climate and environmental hazards, existing settlements and houses may no longer be safe, requiring costly adjustments.


“Physical and mental [[Health|'''health''']], and access to appropriate care in the case of illness or disability”

This becomes an issue in cases of environmental disasters that result from climate change, and can follow from reduced food security as well. 


"'''Opportunities to learn''' anything and everything relevant to one's life"

Climate change will force people to adapt to new situations, which demands learning. We also need to learn how to change our practices in order to reduce the amount of climate change we are likely to face.


“A '''[[Meaningful Livelihoods|meaningful livelihood]]''' that allows one to meet one’s other needs”

Many livelihoods may be destroyed by climate change, especially among agricultural activities. Some people have made it their livelihood to try to avert climate disaster.


“Participation in collective economic and political '''decision-making'''”

Climate change can render the most inclusive and democratic methods of decision-making meaningless. For example, small island nations are faced with man-made sea-level rise that may obliterate them from the face of the earth, but no decisions that they can make locally are able to avert that fate. 
Stopping or even slowing climate change requires a level of collective decision-making unprecedented in human history.


“Having enough '''time''' to relax, to think, to imagine, to enjoy life, to play, to be alone”

Climate change is one of the key factors that makes many people fear that we no longer have such time.


“A freely chosen '''life direction'''”

Climate change and increased hazards may force many of us to face difficult decisions in this regard.



[[NORA Commons Resource Model|Back to NORA main page]]

[[Category:Ecology]] [[Category: Commons Abundance Network]]