=Introduction=

Sentences for draft video at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AqbNtQ-P6K8

VISION Statement created by Michel Bauwens in collaboration with Lawrence Wollersheim and Akasa. Movie produced by Akasa.



=Scenario=


Here is my vision

Our emerging vision  

Together we know everything 

Together we have everything

Each of us has and is

The right piece of the puzzle

Alone we are a fragment

Together we find wholeness

Finding solutions 

Wherever they might be

You are what you make 

You are what you share

To join or create 

That is the question 

The more connected the richer

True wealth is in 

Relationships

More views more light 

Transparency brings light

Illuminates the shadows

Difference enriches 

What we have in common

Information wants to be free

Culture wants to be shared

Life wants to be connected    (need a new image)

Leadership is caring for the whole 

Power with instead of power over   

- (need a new image)

Designing exclusion into inclusion 	

Individuals and collectives are 

Converging     

- (need a new image /add motion effect)

I win                     

- (need a new image)

You win               

- (need a new image)

We all win

More options create better choices

Sharing benefits instead of taking profits 

Give a brick 

Get a house     

- (new lines)

Motivated by passion

- MOVED from up!!

Striving for absolute quality

Through open designs

Ever improving

Producer and user are one      

Know the difference between 

Scarcity and abundance

And humanity will be saved

Peer to Peer is the next 

Emergence of our relatedness

Me to the power of

Us

That is my vision

Our shared vision    

Peer to Peer Alternatives

www.p2pfoundation.net

Michel, the new arrangement is great.
I would suggest the last line, remove At, since
it confuses people as part of the website address.
use all lower case for your website and add one line before.
lowercases are easier to read, no one can remember capitalized phrases

The photo was taken out from a photo of you with your friend who wore a red shirt.
I found it at your home photos/ delicious. your friend also took a photo with your wife.
maybe your wife shoot the photo?



(yes, vision movie always comes with one website page for the statement
person, a page with music credit (I will put my website here), a page for collaborating credit, a page for photographer's credit, last page is a logo of Rocket Ship from the founder Malcolm with whom I am certified as a VISION Statement Movies coach and trainer.)

Please give me the photographer's name (who shoot your photo at the opening page).

- unfortunately, I forgot who made that, did I send you that photo? I can't find it in my own archive file?

I know the name of the person who did the last photo.