
'''=  an association that generates open source software applications and releases the code under a GNU Affero GPL v3. .'''

URL = http://www.2011.fcforum.net/participants/#alabs

=Discussion=

From FC Forum 2011:

"ALabs is an association that generates open source software applications and releases the code under a GNU Affero GPL v3. They presented some of the projects they have developed, such as:

* Nolotiro, allows communities of users to donate all types of products under the slogan “don’t dump that, give it to your neighbour.” Code available at https://github.com/alabs/nolotiro

* Liberateca, a index of links to series, books, etc. Open source, open development, community-based, non-profit and self-managed. Code available at https://github.com/alabs/liberateca

* Oiga.me, An online citizen mobilisation platform that draws attention to social conflicts and causes, and allows users to express their support. During the presentation, the first campaign was approved: Dile a la Junta electoral que #tururu. Other open source platforms such as Actuable and Change.org that have been developed, but they have not released their code. These entities have investors and shareholders. Code available at https://github.com/alabs/oigame.

* Oiga.me is based on xmailer, an application that allows users to fill in a form and send an e-mail to lists of recipients as part of different campaigns. It was used in campaigns such as Blackout Europe in which a million e-mails were sent to European Members of Parliament. It was also used in the campaign against the “Sinde” Law, when the mobile devices of several Members of Parliament were (accidentally)"
(http://www.2011.fcforum.net/en/outcomes11/)


=More information=

# video : http://vimeo.com/31747500

[[Category:15M Movements]]

[[Category:P2P Infrastructure]]

[[Category:Spain]]