

=Description=

From Grok, April 2025:

"Allan Savory: Holistic Management and Grassland Restoration

Allan Savory, a Zimbabwean ecologist, developed Holistic Management, a framework using planned grazing to restore grasslands and reverse desertification. His approach emphasizes livestock as a tool to mimic natural herd behaviors, improving soil health and biodiversity.


Relation to Economic Benefits:

Agricultural Productivity: Savory’s methods have restored millions of hectares globally, increasing grass cover and soil fertility, which boosts livestock yields. This aligns with the 10-20% agricultural yield increases from restored ecosystems, as ranchers gain more productive pastures.

Water Security: By improving soil’s water retention, Holistic Management reduces drought impacts, supporting the World Bank’s estimate that water scarcity could cost 6% of GDP. Restored grasslands retain water for farming and communities, stabilizing economies.

Carbon Sequestration: Savory claims grasslands can sequester significant carbon, potentially offsetting agricultural emissions. This supports climate resilience, avoiding economic damages projected at $54 trillion.

Job Creation and Rural Economies: Holistic Management trains farmers and pastoralists, creating jobs in sustainable ranching. The Savory Institute’s global hubs have impacted over 14 million hectares, supporting rural livelihoods and aligning with the ILO’s job creation estimates.

Example: In Zimbabwe and Australia, Savory’s techniques have turned degraded ranches into thriving grasslands, increasing livestock carrying capacity and farmer incomes. For instance, a ranch in Montana using Holistic Management reported doubled grass production, directly boosting economic returns while enhancing biodiversity.

Reference: Savory’s work is detailed in his book Holistic Management: A Commonsense Revolution to Restore Our Environment and through the Savory Institute (savory.global). Impacts are documented in case studies on their website, showing economic gains from restored lands."


[[Category:Agrifood]]

[[Category:Cases]]

[[Category:Ecology]]

[[Category:Bioregional]]