'''= a budget and resource allocation tool for communities, based on the [[DAOStack]]'''

URL = https://github.com/daostack/alchemy

=Description=

Dor Garbash:

"Alchemy is a budgeting and resource-allocation tool for decentralized organizations. It is an interface that enables thousands of individuals to coordinate towards a common purpose, by proposing and deciding on how to spend funds in alignment with their goals and values.

Some example use cases for Alchemy include decentralized venture funds, charitable funds, innovation funds, a budget proposal system (like Dash but more sophisticated), or prioritizing features for an open-source project.

Alchemy is a Dapp (decentralized application) built on top of DAOstack, a platform for decentralized governance of DAOs (decentralized autonomous organizations). It is proudly open-source and you are welcome to check out the source code."
(https://medium.com/daostack/new-introducing-alchemy-budgeting-for-decentralized-organizations-b81ba8501b23)


=How-To=

"How does it work? Alchemy makes it easy for DAO members to carry out three simple actions:

* Make proposals for the DAO to take a specific action. A proposal is equivalent to a project pitch and includes details about the proposal such as objectives, methods, costs and milestones.

* Predict whether a proposal will be approved or rejected by the organization. This helps guide the collective voting process by sorting and prioritizing the proposals.

* Vote on whether a proposal should be accepted or rejected.
While anyone can propose and predict, only people who hold reputation (voting power) can vote."

(https://medium.com/daostack/new-introducing-alchemy-budgeting-for-decentralized-organizations-b81ba8501b23)

[[Category:Crypto_Governance]]
[[Category:Crypto_Economy]]

[[Category:Cryptoledger_Applications]]
[[Category:Peergovernance]]