'''= the author of two books on [[Protocollary Power]], i.e. [[Protocol]], and, together with Eugene Thacker, The [[Exploit]]'''

Interview: [[Alexander Galloway on Protocollary Power]]


=Status Report, 2007=

"COULD YOU TELL US WHAT ARE YOU WORKING ON RIGHT NOW ? WHICH ARE YOUR
ACTUAL INTERESTS AND ON GOING RESEARCH AT NYU?

I participate in an informal collective of programmers and designers
called RSG. We recently launched the Liberate Computer Language (LCL)
which is a beta attempt to draft a new computer language unlike any
currently in existence. Of course no computer currently exists that can
run the language. But we hope to expand the LCL in the future.

Currently in development is the "Kriegspiel," a work of historical
translation based on the largely forgotten 1978 game designed by
filmmaker and philosopher Guy Debord. The "Kriegspiel" will be released
some time before the end of 2007. Debord's game engages with a number of
interesting questions including the political status of war gaming and
simulation. I am particularly drawn to the game because it appears at
first glance to be rather backward-looking, even nostalgic. Yet on
closer inspection the game contains some interesting details that keep
it relevant to today's world of global networks and perpetual war. In
Debord's own words, it was his only work that had any real value."
(http://cultureandcommunication.org/galloway/interview_barcelona_sept07.txt)


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]