

Alexander R. Galloway, Interviewed by Pau Alsina on September 12, 2007

URL = http://cultureandcommunication.org/galloway/interview_barcelona_sept07.txt


[[Galloway, Alexander]] is the author of two books on [[Protocollary Power]], i.e. [[Protocol]], and, together with Eugene Thacker, The [[Exploit]]


=Text=


'''1- A GENERAL ASSUMPTION IS THAT NETWORKS HAVE THE POTENTIAL TO DEHIERARCHIZE AND DISSOLVE RIGID STRUCTURES OF ALL KINDS. BUT IN YOUR BOOK, "PROTOCOL" REFERS TO THE TECHNOLOGY OF ORGANITZATION AND CONTROL OPERATING IN DISTRIBUTED NETWORKS.  COULD YOU EXPLAIN US A LITTLE BIT MORE THESE PARTICULARITIES? BUT HOW COULD PROTOCOLS BE SUBVERTED? OR WOULD PROTOCOLS FORCE EVERYTHING UNDER ITS TOTALIZING CONTROL APPARATUS?'''

"Protocol" emerges from a problem. The problem is an historical one:
What is the system of organization and control that is endemic to the
distributed networks that currently encompass the globe? And further:
How do the specific transformations within material life bring into
being a set of participatory techniques and behaviors? The concept of
protocol is an attempt to "give a face" to this hitherto faceless form.
But in giving a face to the formerly defaced a new cycle begins, one in
which--I hope--the very asymmetry of historical transformation can be
met and understood within one's own discourse without glamorizing one
component or the other (the tree or the rhizome).


'''2- ALBERT LASZLO-BARABASI DESCRIBED  INTERNET AS A FREE SCALE NETWORK, WITH VERY FEW HIGHLY CONNECTED HUBS WHERE ALL SMALL NODES ARE CONNECTED AND DEPENDENT ON (AND THIS IS TRUE FOR BOTH THE MATERIAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB WITH ITS WEBPAGES INTERCONNECTED). DOES THIS
STRUCTURE DETERMINES COMPLETELY POSSIBLE ACTIONS TO BE DONE?'''

I have a great deal of respect for Barabasi. His famous claim is in fact
a highly political one, even if it is masked in the commanding language
of empirical observation. The interesting questions however are not
whether or not the Internet is a scale-free network, but the following:
Which specific technologies within the Internet are scale-free and which
are not? What sorts of interests are served by making this claim? Why is
Barabasi so intent on prohibiting rhizomatic organization? What is the
architectonic shape of power and how does Barabasi's claim help to
naturalize that power? In the end, I am prompted to ask not what network
do we have, but what network do we desire? There is a certain naive
rhetoric around networks being liberating, being anti-hierarchy,
"information wants to be free," and so on. But what Barabasi indicates
is precisely the opposite: we do not desire networks to be free, we
expend any amount of energy to abolish them in a wash of retrograde,
pyramidal reorganization.

The key problem then, to use psychoanalytic terminology, is that the new
media are fundamentally sadistic, when in fact we are currently treating
them as if they were masochistic. This is the central problem for desire
today.

But beyond this classical method of "ideology critique" I must also
observe that Barabasi offers a very reactionary answer to a very
progressive question. Is it not rather convenient that this new
technology resembles the corporate or even royalist decentralized and
centralized networks of yore? Again, I find this approach entirely
lacking in imagination. Instead I pose the question: how can the
distributed network itself offer a novel form of organization and
control, without recourse to anachronistic (but familiar) diagrams? To
answer this question would be to address the sadistic essence of new
media directly. Barabasi answers this question instead through a
slight-of-hand: what was thought to be a rhizome is in fact a tree! The
more his claim is ratified with any number of graph-theory studies and
mathemetical models, the more it is denuded as pure fantasy projection.
Instead we require entirely new anti-histories of technology, histories
of technology from the eye of the swarm. 


'''3- SO WE HAVE PROTOCOLS, NETWORKS, LANGUAGES AND UNDERLYING ALGORITHMS IN THE PROGRAMMES THAT STRUCTURE ACTIONS. AN ALGORITHM IS A DEFINED SET OF INSTRUCTIONS IN ORDER TO SOLVE A PROBLEM. WE JUST HAVE TO FOLLOW ITS INSTRUCTIONS BECAUSE THE INTELLIGENCE REQUIRED TO DO THE TASK IT'S ALREADY CODIFIED IN THE ALGORITHM. BUT WHAT ABOUT THE POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS INSCRIBED IN  THOSE ALGORITHMS? IS IT GOOGLE PAGE RANK ALGORITHM FREE OF POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS?'''

Page Rank is a highly political technology. It is, in fact, the most
important political question we have in our culture: how knowledge is
connected to power. This has been the reigning question in Western
culture since the Greeks. Google has succeeded in radically altering
this terrain in the contemporary arena. What impresses me most about
Google is the valorization question: they have discovered new techniques
for valorizing human activity. Both work and play may now be exploited.
Much more needs to be studied in this area. I am particularly interested
in the question of unpaid micro-labor (i.e. all of us sending emails,
blogging, surfing, etc.) which Google has proven exceptionally adept at
extracting. It has dramatically changed the status of labor in today's
world.


'''4- AS FLORIAN CRAMER SAYS SOFTWARE CONSTRUCTS WAYS OF SEEING, KNOWING AND DOING IN THE WORLD THAT AT ONCE CONTAIN A MODEL OF THAT PART OF THE WORLD IT OSTENSIBLY PERTAINS TO AND THAT ALSO SHAPE IT EVERY TIME IT IS USED. SO A COMPUTER'S ONTOLOGY AND ITS DECONSTRUCTION THROUGH ART AND
PHILOSOPHICAL PRACTICE ARE NEEDED IN ORDER TO EVOKE THEIR CONTROL STRUCTURES LIVING BEHIND. TURNING UPSIDE DOWN ALGORITHMS COULD BE CONSIDERED AS NEW TACTICAL MEDIA TOOLS? IS THAT WHAT YOU WERE TRYING TO DO THROUGH YOUR ARTISTIC PROJECTS AS RSG AND THE DATA SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM CARNIVORE?'''

I advocate tactics of engagement. It is through the computer that we
must direct our energies, not against it. This is what Eugene Thacker
and I call "hypertrophy." Perhaps where I diverge from your assessment
of Cramer is the following: there is no such thing as a computer's
ontology that is dutifully deconstructed at a later date through art and
philosophy. It is in fact the reverse: deconstruction is precisely what
evokes the ontological status of the computer. It is what brings it to
presence. This is what Thacker and I call the exploit. The exploit is
not the "exception" that stands outside and happens from time to
time--like an earthquake--bringing with it some calamity or radical
transformation of the current state of affairs. The exploit is in fact
the very necessary condition for rhizomatic, which is to say machinic,
being.


This is how Thacker and I define the exploit as an abstract machine:

* Vector: The exploit requires an organic or inorganic medium in which
there exists some form of action or motion.

	
* Flaw: The exploit requires a set of vulnerabilities in a network
that allow the vector to be logically accessible. These
vulnerabilities  are also the network's conditions for realization,
its becoming-unhuman.

	
* Transgression: The exploit creates a shift in the ontology of the
network, in which the "failure" of the network is in fact a change
in its topology (for example: from centralized to distributed).

Thus it is my impulse to scrap any talk about ontology versus
deconstruction (and also why one must be extremely careful with any talk
of "counter protocols" or "counter games"). With computing
"deconstruction" precedes "ontology" to such a degree that they both
collapse inward upon themselves. 


'''5- SO MANY HAVE BEEN SAID ABOUT THE WEB 2.0 UTOPIAS AS NEW BUSINESS MODELS TEND TO CAPITALIZE ONLINE FREE COOPERATION INMATERIAL LABOUR AS TREBOR SCHOLZ HAS EXPLORED EXTENSIVELY. BUT IT ALSO MAKES POSSIBLE DISTRIBUTED MODES OF ORGANIZATION AND A RENEWED AND REALISTIC OPTIMISM AS GEERT LOVINK SAYS. WOULD THE SOCIAL SOFTWARE MOVEMENT BE NEW MODELS FOR POLITICAL INTERVENTION IN DISTRIBUTED NETWORKING?'''

The contributions of Lovink and Scholz are invaluable. Development of
the productive forces is always a dialectical process. The problem is
that most today do not even recognize that a development of the
productive forces is taking place! Social software is cast as
liberating, democratizing, and so on, which it undeniably is, but more
important is the fact that today we are ushering in a whole new system
of informatic value extraction and exploitation. The web is, in essence,
the world's largest sweat shop. The phenomenon is evident across the
spectrum of web technologies, but also in the biological realm as life
itself has emerged front and center as the central locus of valorization
and exploitation. In this sense companies like Google and Monsanto are
marching in lock step, for they both use informatic spaces (the
internet, the genome) to extract new forms of uncompensated value. They
both are leveraging the ability for life to self-valorize. Of course
anyone familiar with the modern era will note that this process has been
happening for a long time. The key question for us is not if or how this
is happening; the key question has to do with the moral state of matter.


'''6- SOME THEORICIANS AS FRIEDICH KITTLER HAVE ARGUED ABOUT THE IMAGE CENTERED APPROACH TO NEW MEDIA PRACTICES THAT HAS NOT TAKEN IN CONSIDERATION  THE IMPLICIT CALCULABILITY OF DIGITAL IMAGES AS A KEY FACTOR FOR ITS ANALYSIS. WILL THIS NEW APPROACH LEAD TO THE ACTION'S DISCUSSION AS KEY ELEMENTS FOR CRITIQUE IN SOFTWARE AND VIDEOGAMES AS YOU HAVE BEEN EXPLORING IN YOUR LATEST BOOK GAMING? WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO CHANGE IMAGE FOR ACTION?'''

Certainly the algorithm, not the image, is of crucial importance today.
However I maintain that the only way to understand software is to claim
first that it is a question of the visual, and then later to assert the
algorithmic as the real for which visuality was a helpful symptom. Much
writing on the "information age" or "cyber culture" misses this crucial
point about the visual. Few truly acknowledge that the computer was born
not from the age of information but the age of spectacle. Informatics is
what Marx would have called a real subsumption--but of what? Of the
visual. By this I mean the entire visual episteme handed down from the
Enlightenment, seeing as a structure for knowledge acquisition, the
"clarity" of reason, the logos of the eye, and so on. Software is
essentially the real subsumption of that episteme. But not at all to
preserve it--this is crucial. A real subsumption is always a complete
erasure of its object (as opposed to the formal subsumption which merely
negates its object in a dialectical inversion). The real subsumption of
the visual, its erased "un," allows informatics both to retain and deny
its viability.


7- AS YOU SAY THERE ARE ALSO TRUE POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS IN THE ALLEGORIES OF CONTROL INSCRIBED IN VIDEOGAMES, AS IT DEMONSTRATES THE SINISTER POSSIBILITIES OF INFORMATIC DOMINION. IT IS ALSO A WAY IN WHICH BIOPOWER FORMULATES ITSELF PRODUCING CREATIVELY POWER RELATIONSHIPS THAT CONSTRUCT WAYS OF LOOKING AND THINKING ABOUT REALITY PRODUCED. DOES THE COUNTERGAMING REPRESENT AN EFFECTIVE SUBVERSIVE PRACTICE AGAINST THIS DOMINANT HEGEMONY OF GAMES STRUCTURE? HOW THIS CAN BE DONE?

My claim about counter-gaming is in fact that it's exceptionally
difficult to achieve. It is possible to cite a micro trend from the last
several years in which artists have created game mods that essentially
deny the reality of play itself. Perhaps we can chalk this up to a sort
of "modernist" nostalgia in which the artists wish to revert to an
earlier modality of non-interactive media, which can only redeem itself
through convulsions of formal introspection. Of course I am also guilty
of this.

But there is also a counter current which has a long history.
Buckminster Fuller's "World Game" is one example that I am particularly
interested in. The question is: What constitutes a progressive
algorithm? The answer to this question is rather hard to uncover. Many
of today's so-called "serious games" are in fact quite reactionary at
the level of the algorithm, even if they cloak themselves in progressive
political desires on the surface (gaming to "save Darfur," and so on).

The secret of counter-gaming is therefore the quest to create
alternative algorithms. This is something that history has seen very
little of. The vast majority of algorithmic research and development
throughout history has unfolded under the banner of rather dubious
political virtues: efficiency, expediency, machinic mastery.

I have recently been calling this phenomenon the "separative cause." The
separative cause brings things into existence through a segregation
effect between the realm of the social (or ideal) and the realm of the
material. In such a system exploitation is material, while liberation is
semiotic. The material is the realm of political failure; the social is
the realm of utopian compromise.

Many games fall into this same trap: the liberating and infantilizing
attraction of play--which is truly real, I am not denying it--is only
ever experienced via a material substrate that is physically and morally
retrograde.

An example. People often comment on the so-called problem of "Chinese"
gold farming in games. But in fact it is the reverse: we are the gold
farmers."


=More Information=

#Book: [[Protocol]]; The [[Exploit]]
#Concept: [[Protocollary Power]]


[[Category:Interviews]]

[[Category:Governance]]

[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]