Video via https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I7kCThKW65A

=Description=

"In this episode, Jason Snyder speaks with Alex Corren about ReCommon, which aims to address the logistics and financing around land access and tenure for regenerative stewardship, in particular catalyzing the creation of a network of bioregionally embedded regenerative land trusts. They also touch on the shared vision of ‘networked bioregionalism’ as the most viable and hopeful path for the future

They explored intriguing concepts like contemplative practices, consciousness, and bioregionalism, all converging on the innovative notion of Regenerative Community Land Trusts.

The discussion began by emphasizing the significance of consciousness in effecting real change. Alex stressed that having the right tools and governance systems isn't enough without a collective awareness to implement them effectively. Drawing inspiration from permaculture and indigenous land management, he challenged the conventional idea of private property, advocating for communal stewardship.

The heart of the conversation revolved around Community Land Trusts (CLTs), tracing their origins back to the Civil Rights Movement. Alex highlighted how CLTs offer an alternative to traditional property ownership, providing affordable land access while preserving it as a shared and regeneratively managed resource.

The conversation extended to the importance of bioregional nodes—distinct ecological and cultural regions—within ReCommon's framework. These nodes foster local decision-making, strengthening community bonds, and nurturing resilient ecosystems.

Practical aspects of Regenerative Community Land Trusts were also explored, including governance models and equity promotion. Alex and Jason discussed how ReCommon offers an alternative to conventional property ownership, paving the way for a more sustainable and interconnected future."

(https://www.recommon.land/blog/doomer-optimism-podcast-regenerative-community-land-trusts-with-alex-corren-and-jason-snyder)


=More information=

* Podcast: [[Alex Corren on the Need for Regenerative Communities]]

[[Category:Regenerative_Approaches]]
[[Category:Agrifood]]
[[Category:Podcasts]]
[[Category:Commons_Infrastructure]]