=Description=

From the Wikipedia:

"Alexander Leonidovich Chizhevsky, 7 February 1897 – 20 December 1964, was a Soviet-era interdisciplinary scientist, a biophysicist who founded "heliobiology" (study of the Sun's effect on biology) and "aero-ionization" (study of effect of ionization of air on biological entities). He was also noted for his work in "cosmo-biology", biological rhythms and hematology.

...

Chizhevsky proposed that not only did geomagnetic storms resulting from sunspot-related solar flares affect electrical usage, plane crashes, epidemics and grasshopper infestations, but human mental life and activity. Increased negative ionization in the atmosphere increased human mass excitability. Chizhevsky proposed that human history is influenced by the eleven-year peaks in sunspot activity, triggering humans en masse to act upon existing grievances and complaints through revolts, revolutions, civil wars and wars between nations.[

He analyzed sunspot records (and approximated records), comparing them to riots, revolutions, battles and war in Russia and seventy-one other countries for the period 500 BCE to 1922 CE. (A process known as historiometry.) He found that a significant percent of what he classified as the most important historical events involving large numbers of people occurred around sunspot maximum. 

Edward R. Dewey, founder of the [[Foundation for the Study of Cycles]], analyzed and published his data in 1951 in the Foundation's publications. 


In a 1971 book Dewey described the "four components" of Chizhevsky's eleven-year cycle and their approximate lengths: 

1) a three-year period of minimum activity characterized by passivity and autocratic rule; 

2) a two-year period during which masses begin to organize under new leaders and one theme; 

3) a three-year period of maximum excitability, revolution and war; 

4) a three-year period of gradual decrease in excitability until the masses are apathetic. 


Dewey questioned Chizhevsky's theory because in Chizhevsky's data, the sunspot cycle height lagged about a year ahead his "mass excitability index."

In 1992 Arcady A. Putilov, a researcher in Animal and Human Physiology, published a paper empirically testing Chizhevsky hypothesis analyzing events described in Soviet historical handbooks. Putilov found that the frequency and "polarity" of events, including revolution, is the highest in the years of the solar cycle maximum and the lowest in the year before the minimum. In 1996 professor of psychology Suitbert Ertel (University of Göttingen) corroborated a "substantial" relationship between solar activity and revolutionary behavior through statistical analysis of a "Master Index of Violence from Below" (MIVE) for the period 1700–1985 CE."

(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Chizhevsky)


=More information=

*  “The [[World-Historical Cycles]],” from The Earth in the Sun’s Embrace Alexander Chizhevsky

https://syllabusproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/the-world-historical-cycles-alexander-chizhevsky-.pdf

Alexander Chizhevsky, Space Pulse of Life. (Originally titled The Earth In The Embrace Of The Sun), Moscow: Misl, 1995 (in Russian) with preface to by L. V. Golovanov.


* [[Physical Factors of the Historical Process]]. Alexander L. Chizhevsky.

URL = https://progress-in-physics.com/2024/PP-69-01.PDF

"The influence of cosmic factors on the behaviour of organized human masses and on
the course of the world-historical process, beginning from the 5th century B.C. and until
the present time. This is a short presentation of my research and theory."


See also:

John T Burns, Cosmic Influences on Humans, Animals and Plants: An Annotated Bibliography, 1997, Magill Bibliographies, ISBN 0-8108-3313-1.

Prof. L.A. Blyumenfel’d, editor, Solar Activity & The Biosphere: Heliobiology. From A.L. Chizhevsky To The Present by Boris M. Vladimirsky, N.A. Temuryants/Temurjants. Russian Academy of Natural Sciences. 1999. 30 pages, 93 figures, 24 tables, and Bibliography with 500 items. Distributed by: International Independent Ecological & Politological University, Ulitsa Krasnokazatskaya 44, Zdanie MEI Moscow Power Generation Institute Building, Moscow, Russia.


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Civilizational_Analysis]]
[[Category:P2P_Cycles]]
[[Category:Bios]]