
* Book: Algorithms of Capital. Ed./curated by Matteo Pasquinelli.

URL = http://matteopasquinelli.com/algorithms-of-capital/

=Description=

The book is based on the #Acclerationisty politics. Anyway the above
link is to Italian version. Yet most of the articles are already
online in English. 


=Contents=

the links to English versions:

* Accelerate: Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics by Alex
Williams and Nick Srnicek
http://syntheticedifice.wordpress.com/2014/03/13/accelerate-manifesto-for-an-accelerationist-politics/

* Reflections on the Manifesto for an Accelerationist Politics by Toni
Negri: http://syntheticedifice.wordpress.com/2014/03/01/riflessioni-sul-manifesto-per-una-politica-accelerazionista/

* Mattoe Pasquinelli: 

“To Anticipate and Accelerate: Italian Operaismo
and Reading Marx’s Notion of Organic Composition of Capital”,
Rethinking Marxism journal, vol. 26, n. 2, 2014.
:http://matteopasquinelli.com/anticipate-an

“The Power of Abstraction and Its
Antagonism. On Some Problems Common to Contemporary Neuroscience and
the Theory of Cognitive Capitalism”,Psychopathologies of Cognitive
Capitalism, Part 2. Berlin: Archive Books,  2014.:
http://matteopasquinelli.com/power-of-abstraction/]

* Red stack attack! Algorithms, capital and the automation of the common
– by Tiziana Terranova:
http://quaderni.sanprecario.info/2014/02/red-stack-attack-algorithms-capital-and-the-automation-of-the-common-di-tiziana-terranova/

* #Celerity: A Critique of the Manifesto for an Accelerationist
Politics: http://syntheticedifice.wordpress.com/2013/06/28/celerity-a-critique-of-the-manifesto-for-an-accelerationist-politics/

=Discussion=

Orsan Senalp:

"Here is how I would formulate a part of the code needs yet to be put
in algorithms:

I agree with many others who think global working class is currently
making it self
through ongoing and intensifying struggles. In my opinion any form of
self-organisation of the global working classes needs to be,
simultaneously very well grounded, transnational, and global. It also
needs to be open to all the working people, so free [gratis and
accessible] to enter and leave, designed as modularly integrated
organized networks linking workers [including hacker-, academic-,
art-, sex-. ... so on workers],
social-environmental-cultural-informational-sexual justice activists.

Adoptable principles, in form of the 'code', which can be
pre-determined, as well as the coding process itself needs to be very
well documented, totally open and accesible to local, workplace,
neighbourhood, issue based, activist or other forms of political
collectives. In a way similar to Anonymous, 15M, Occupy, Gezi. or
other decentralized forms, but with more structured and open working
protocols, as it is in FLOSS projects, or grassroots and worker
cooperatives. It sould not be including membership, service,
representation type logics that leads to reproduction of
disempowerment for the involving nodes. It should not be organized by
intellectual activists from out side in, and from top down towards the
working class. With an opposite perspective, it should be designed by
volunteer participation based on self-governing and representation
principles. It should be able to put forward creative, assertive and
effective direct non-violent mass action, which makes fun of and
ridicule the target by allowing the formation of collective
intelligence. Therefore active peer to peer self-learninig should be
the core cultural production and learning principle. Instead of having
teachers who must show the right and enlightented road to the
candidate working class members, who needs to get a
self-consciousness, a global and networked labour union should be
providing working people with the access to the tools, resources and
key networks that would make self- empowerment easily possible. By
linking spaces where continious open exchanges take place and carry
the energy from one space to other. Utilizing How to(s), Do it
Yourself and Do it With Others guides, in online and real world
context, by FLOSS communication tools as well as mass-action tactics
it would replace top down (issue-anger-action) organizing model, which
would allow self-articulation, respectful and collaborative working
praxis by harmonized through peer to peer digital communication -where
possible and desirable, as well as face to face and secure meetings,
cultural and recreational events cultural events. It should be
collaboraing with other organizations, creative and productive
projects that undermines capitalist mode of production and develop the
algorithms and codes of alternative modes, as operating systems that
could replace capitalism. Such global network needs to grow by linking
existing radical networks groups of activists, hackers, organizers,
makers, DIY groups, squatters, eco-willages, diggers, immigrants,
asylum seekers, solidarity networks, and so on. In a way all nodes
could associate with the globally networked ties, while keeping their
autonomy.

So instead of #Accelerate motto, i would suggest some thing like:
"All empower one, one empower all!"


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]