
'''* Article:  Global Labor: Algocratic Modes of Organization. By A. Aneesh. Sociological Theory, Vol. 27, No. 4 (Dec., 2009), pp. 347-370'''

URL = https://www.jstor.org/stable/40376117

=Abstract=

"This study investigates a practice that allows workers based in India to work online on projects for corporations in the United States, representing a new mode of labor integration. In the absence of direct bureaucratic control across continents, the question arises how this rapidly growing labor practice is organized. The riddle of organizational governance is solved through an analysis of software programming schemes, which are presented as the key to organizing globally dispersed labor through data servers. This labor integration through programming code is distinguished from two other systems of organization—bureaucracy and the market—while bringing out the salient features of each system in terms of its ruling principle: bureaucracy (legalrational), the market (price), and algocracy (programming or algorithm). The logic of algocratic systems is explored methodically to analyze global work."

=More Information=

See also:

'''* Article: [[Technologically Coded Authority]]: The [[Post-Industrial Decline in Bureaucratic Hierarchies]]. By A. Aneesh'''

URL = https://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/NewFiles/Algocratic%20Governance.pdf

“Once fully established, bureaucracy is among those social structures which are the
hardest to destroy ... As an instrument of rationally organizing authority relations, bureaucracy was
and is a power instrument of the first order for one who controls the bureaucratic
apparatus...Where administration has been completely bureaucratized, the resulting system of
domination is practically indestructible” (Weber, 1978, p. 987).

The indestructibility of bureaucratic structures prophesied by Weber seems no
longer a stable truth. More and more corporations in America are experiencing the
de-layering and flattening of bureaucratic hierarchies. Bureaucratic authority in
the workplace suddenly seems less visible and repressive. Is it reasonable to see
such changes as signifying the end of bureaucratic management, as some scholars
seem to suggest (e.g., Kanter, 1991)? Does post-industrial management – with its
flexible work systems – introduce extensive autonomy in the workplace, reducing
the level of immediate worker control? The shift in the structures of workplace
governance, I argue, is not from more to less governance. The new forms of
management are increasingly embedded in technology itself without reducing the
efficacy and effects of earlier bureaucracies. In particular, I identify the role of
programming languages – a rather understudied component of the workplace – in
the emerging complex of organizational governance.

In an ideal-typical sense, the new form of management – or what I call algocracy,
i.e., the rule of algorithm – shifts from its industrial predecessor chiefly in two
respects. First, domination is less and less distributed through elaborate worker
hierarchies; rather, it is increasingly effected through information and software
systems that structure the possible forms of work behavior. Second, algocratic
governance appears to partly transform the early subject-object relationships,
where a superordinate as an observing subject must watch over the work of a
subordinate. This shift is marked by an authority relation enabled through
information systems and networks, where all are subordinated as nodes in such 
networks. My argument relates the continued disintegration of vertical
management to the emerging architecture of information systems.

I begin by discussing certain organizational transformations that are seen as
undermining the importance of bureaucratic hierarchies and vertical integration. I
pay special attention to the reduction in the layers of middle-management widely
discussed in literatures of sociology as well as economics, business and
management. I then distinguish among three modes of organizational governance
– bureaucratic, panoptic, and algocratic – and emphasize the salient features of
each in terms of three different ruling mechanisms: office, surveillance, and code
respectively. The logic of algocratic forms of governance is explored
methodically to demonstrate how algocracy differs from other forms. Although
the chief contribution of this article is to organizational theory, the argument has
its origins in empirical research conducted in New Jersey (U.S.A.) and Delhi,
Noida, Gurgaon (India) in 1999-2000. Based on 50 formal and a similar number
of informal in-depth interviews with programmers and executives of some 20
firms in the U.S. and India, this research focused on how India-based software
companies provide a variety of software-enabled services to corporations in the
U.S. This article uses some of the data collected from this research to provide
clarity and illustration to what is primarily a theoretical endeavor. I end with some
ideas about a research program that stems from this fresh space for questioning."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]