
'''* Report: EXPLAINER: [[Algorithmic Management]] in the Workplace. By ALEXANDRA MATEESCU and AIHA NGUYEN. Data & Society  February 2019'''

URL = datasociety.net [https://datasociety.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DS_Algorithmic_Management_Explainer.pdf? pdf]


=Description=

ALEXANDRA MATEESCU and AIHA NGUYEN:

"Algorithmic management is a diverse set of technological tools and techniques to
remotely manage workforces, relying on data collection and surveillance of workers to
enable automated or semi-automated decision-making. Many of the characteristics of
algorithmic management—such as consumer-sourced rating systems and automated
“nudges”—were developed by companies of the “sharing” or “gig” economy. These
practices have spurred debates over employee classification, as “gig” economy
companies classify workers as independent contractors even as they use technology
to exert control over their workforces.

And algorithmic management is becoming more common in other work contexts
beyond “gig” platforms. Within delivery and logistics, companies from UPS to Amazon
to grocery chains are using automated systems to optimize delivery workers’ daily
routes. Domestic workers and hotel housekeepers are increasingly remotely tracked and
managed through software. In retail and service industries, automated scheduling is
replacing managers’ discretion over employee schedules, while the work of evaluating
employees is being transferred to consumer-sourced rating systems."
(https://datasociety.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DS_Algorithmic_Management_Explainer.pdf?)

=Characteristics=

ALEXANDRA MATEESCU and AIHA NGUYEN:

"Algorithmic management can describe systems of varying degrees of complexity, but
they typically include:

• Prolific data collection and surveillance of workers through technology;
• Real-time responsiveness to data that informs management decisions;
• Automated or semi-automated decision-making;
• Transfer of performance evaluations to rating systems or other metrics; and
• The use of “nudges” and penalties to indirectly incentivize worker behaviors. "

(https://datasociety.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DS_Algorithmic_Management_Explainer.pdf?)

=Discussion=

==Effects on Labor==

ALEXANDRA MATEESCU and AIHA NGUYEN:

"Adoption of these technologies is generating new challenges for workers’ rights in four
broad areas:

• Surveillance and control: Technology-enabled surveillance can generate new
speed and efficiency pressures for workers and may lock workers out from
important aspects of decision making, such as being able to use personal
discretion.

• Transparency: Algorithmic management can create power imbalances that
may be difficult to challenge without access to how these systems work as well as
the resources and expertise to adequately assess them.

• Bias and discrimination: If used to make decisions about workers, tools like
consumer-sourced rating systems can introduce biased and discriminatory
practices towards workers.

• Accountability: Algorithmic management can be used to distance companies
from the effects of their business decisions, obscuring specific decisions made
about how a system should function."

(https://datasociety.net/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DS_Algorithmic_Management_Explainer.pdf?)


[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Articles]]