

=Description=

A. Aneesh:

"Bureaucratic domination was exercised by making people accept the authority of
impersonal rules and regulations. Technical imperatives of algocratic governance,
however, do not require bureaucratic orientation and authority relation to the same
degree. Programming technologies have gained ability to structure possible forms
of behavior without much need for orienting people toward accepting the rules.
Under the algocratic mode of governance, work is controlled not by telling the
worker to perform a task, nor necessarily by punishing the worker for their
failure, but by shaping an environment in which there are no alternatives to
performing the work as prescribed. For example, while filling in the “fields” on a 
computer, a bank teller cannot type in the wrong part of a form, or put the address
in where the phone number goes. Software templates provide pre-existing
channels that guide action in precise ways. Within an algocratic framework,
authority does not need legitimacy in the Weberian sense, because there are either
no alternative routes or such routes are themselves pre-given and programmed.
There is no comparison that can be used to de-legitimate authority. This is what I
imply by algocracy, where authority is more and more embedded in technology
itself, or more specifically, in the underlying code, rendering the hierarchical
system of authority relations less useful. Thus, the indestructibility of bureaucratic
structures predicted by Weber is less valid despite (or because of) the continued
advance of formal rationality. Contemporary forms of management increasingly
rely on algocratic governance embedded in software codes and templates, without
completely replacing the order achieved through typical bureaucratic
organization.

Programming languages have empowered the smart machine with the ability not
only to point out the incorrect steps taken by the user, but also to suggest at times
the correct method to the ignorant worker. Unlike the unlettered machines of the
industrial age, the new machine has the ability to communicate commands as an
authority in addition to faithfully carrying out commands of the worker. The
ability of the computer to assume the role of the controlling authority – apart from
being the object of work – turns the unidirectional relationship with industrial
machines on its head."
(https://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/NewFiles/Algocratic%20Governance.pdf)

=Discussion=

A. Aneesh:

"The supremacy of a particular dimension of governance
has specific effects in actual organizations. Algocratic governance implements a
flatter, network-based power relation, where all are subordinated as nodes in
computer networks, giving rise to what is called “horizontal corporation.” As
Manuel Castells (Castells, 1996, p. 176) points out, “The main shift can be
characterized as the shift from vertical bureaucracies to the horizontal
corporation.” The decreasing significance of managerial hierarchies, I contend,
does not imply the decline of “management” or the liberation of the worker;
rather, the new structures are invested with a different form of power. The
continued disintegration of vertical management may in fact be linked with the
rise of technologically coded authority. For the sake of convenience, we may
explore algocratic governance along three lines: work structure, workflow, and
work-related decisions to understand its connection with vertical disintegration
and horizontal integration. 

Organizations are above all specific cases of organization or the structuring of
work. Most research on bureaucracy has tended to focus on real organizations
populated by people and bounded by walls. Against this sociological realism,
Weber’s original idea of legal-rational organization of organizations was a little
lost. With the analysis of algocratic governance, I wish to get to back to the basis
of organizations, that is, organization, or the ordering of work. As I pointed out
earlier, the basic difference between bureaucratic governance and algocratic
governance is that the organization of the first revolves around impersonal,
written rules that everyone must adhere to, whereas the second is based on
underlying codes that do not necessarily require rule adherence, as they tend to
channel work behavior along programmed logics. Let me describe how banking
software is developed by programmers in India for a U.S.-based bank and how
this code then governs actual work behavior. 


A systems analyst described the
development and function of such application software as follows:

- Application software is…like banking as an application. What we do is
support your daily requirements for banking applications like daily branch
opening, your account handling, your money transfers, everything, the routine
tasks for which there is a need to build the software. It's very routine because
most rules are documented. You just have to implement those business rules
into software programs.

Installed on the transnational platform of a bank’s distributed computer networks,
these applications turn rules and routines into algorithmic code, acquiring a
certain power of structuring, for instance, how a bank teller would perform her
tasks. 


Let us see how this kind of bank application guides and governs a bank
teller’s work behavior in her own words:

- You log on, do your password, then your screen opens...there are functions on
the top, that say twenty one is a cash advance, twenty two is..., and it does
nothing until you put in the number for the transaction you’re going to do.
Then there is a list of the amount—is it cash, is it check, does he want cash
back...and [the relevant screen] pops up; if it’s over a certain amount, another
screen pops up and says, did you check ID. So, it’s pretty basic, it takes you
step by step through the transaction. It says, now give the customer this much
money, and asks you if this amount is correct. And so you fill in numbers for
all the sections, hit enter, it will take you to the next step. You will validate
the thing you’re holding – the check, the slip, the transaction – and then it asks
if there is anything else you want to do for the customer. And you say yes, or
no. 

This example of algorithm-based structure clearly demonstrates how the worker’s
subjective orientation or adherence to rules is less important than following the
steps suggested by the program, which tends to disallow other ways of doing
work. Even if organizations use a graphical interface that seems to offer more
choices for the worker, all choices are already pre-programmed. Such software
applications are not confined to banks alone; their use is quite widespread in
many different kinds of organizations: airports, hospitals, department stores as
well as state institutions like the Department of Motor Vehicles to cite a few.
Algocratic governance relates to this programmability of work. Most institutions
in the United States have injected the dimension of algocratic governance into
their existing bureaucratic controls.

The dominance of algocracies has not yet reached its highest point. In my
interviews, many systems analysts corroborated the findings of Salzman and
Rosenthal (Salzman and Rosenthal, 1994) that institutions prefer to replicate the
previous work structure into software systems despite the systems analysts’
contention about their inefficiency. This insertion of algocracies into bureaucratic
work structures is taking on different forms. Corporate attempts to completely reengineer
their organization through various Enterprise systems (e.g., ERP or
Enterprise Resource Planning systems) not only exemplify efforts at avoiding the
inefficiencies of earlier systems; they also point to a rethinking of the very
structure of organization. Just as the organization of McDonald’s tends to utilize
certain fixed principles (e.g., the physical arrangement of the kitchen and counter
along with cooking devices and workers) in their franchises around the world, it
has become possible to create templates of work organization coded in software
programs that can be customized to a business’s particular needs. In a certain
sense, software companies in India are in the business of selling customized
organizations, complete with ready-made templates and modules of supply chain
management, payroll, job costing, sales force automation, product lifecycle
management, and customer relationship management.

Algocracy also points to another kind of organizational governance – governance
by simulation. It would be a mistake to think of the term “office” in Microsoft
Office suite as merely metaphorical, as this Office does contain folders, files and
databases that can fill up real file cabinets in real offices; it does contain an
accounting department that can download real data from the banks and process it;
soon it will also contain a secretary that can take dictation. Numerous customized
enterprise software systems being developed by software vendors in India do not
merely represent the real; rather, they produce the real. These simulated
organizations running on silicon chips do not necessarily follow real
organizations; rather, they precede them. Reality follows the simulacrum, which
is “…the generation by models of a real without origin or reality: a hyperreal”
(Baudrillard, 1983). Enterprise software systems are not merely the automation of
existing processes, as many software professionals themselves understand it; they
also relate in a deeper sense to an imagining of processes that do not yet exist but
need to be born. Quite like models of cars and machinery designed through CAD 
(computer aided design) systems, simulated models of organiza tional processes
facilitate a controlled outcome. Elaborating upon the concept of simulation, one
of the computer scientists stressed various advantages of simulating expensive
products “in the mind of your computer. If you are doing a space shuttle, for
instance, they can’t afford to send five space shuttles to figure out some mistakes
first. So, they simulate everything inside a computer to see if it will work.”

Similarly, coded templates of organization do not only mimic and express already
existing structures; they also reflect the rise of a technology that can potentially
program an imagined system of governance even before it actually exists. There
are surely a number of failures in the implementations of such imagined
processes, but failures themselves point to a definite transformation in
conceptions of control and governance. Programmability means governability.
Algocratic governance allows corporations to experiment with a different physical
structure as well. If the same organizational template can be accessed via
remotely located data servers, corporations attain the ability to tap globally
dispersed cheaper human resources with more ease. 


Some major software
companies already have a structure where their teams are based in both the U.S.
and India, working on the same project within an algocratic framework. One CEO
describes this work practice as follows:

- So there are several components. There twenty people working in the U.S. and
20 people in India. They are doing different things. But the mother ship is the
same; it goes into the same product. So you are working on the same database,
you are working on the same code. You are working on the same thing…we
are sharing…a data server [and] we are working on those systems. Except for
the fact that we are in India, we could be sitting across the room from those
people and working.

I would not go as far as this claim to working across the room, but transnational
data servers do allow a certain immediacy and structure that was not possible
earlier. Due to algocratic governance structures, there is a development of vendors
that specialize in providing staff from different corners of the world to
corporations that agree to use their platform code. I reproduce the statement of
one of such companies below followed by a screen shot of their platform:
[This company] offers a unique solution that combines the benefits of
contingent staffing with virtual access to a global workforce. Using [the
company’s] technology to break the geographic constraints of traditional
staffing, companies can now deploy remotely located knowledge workers in a
task-based environment. In other words, the [company’s] system enables
customers to define their work as tasks that can then be dynamically assigned
to a global network of virtual knowledge workers (MagicStaff, 2002).


The ability of organizations to employ workers not located within the walls of
their organization does not mean that the centralized structures of organizations
will suddenly disappear. As corporations must abide by national regulatory laws,
their structures will continue to carry the conventional image of firms located in
specific national spaces with definite physical address and staff. But the
expansion of algocratic regime points out a certain blurring of enterprise
boundaries within the existing framework. The explosion of practices commonly
described in economistic terms as subcontracting and outsourcing signals a
business-to-business integration established through the rule of code. If customers
call their bank in the U.S., using their 1-800 number and the phone rings in a firm
located in India that can provide various services by directly accessing customers’
accounts in real time via data servers, there is a development of a governance
structure that extends beyond the unitary model of organizations registered with
the state. If travelers are automatically given the option of renting a car from a
rental company on the website of an airline after purchasing an air ticket, this
organizational integration is clearly a result of code-based governance, or more
precisely, SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) Toolkit, which allows
workflows not only within an organization but also between separate firms."
(https://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/NewFiles/Algocratic%20Governance.pdf)

=Source=

* Article: Technologically Coded Authority: The [[Post-Industrial Decline in Bureaucratic Hierarchies]]. By A. Aneesh

URL = https://web.stanford.edu/class/sts175/NewFiles/Algocratic%20Governance.pdf

[[Category:Mutual Coordination]]

[[Category:Labor]]

[[Category:Protocols_and_Algorithms]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]

[[Category:Governance]]