

=Discussion=

==Alignment vs. Agreement==

Yasuhiko G. Kimura:

"Alignment is congruence of intention, whereas
agreement is congruence of opinion.

Opinion is a supposition elevated to the status of a
conclusion held to be right but not substantiated by
positive proof—rational or evidential. Because
disagreement means difference of opinion,
disagreement often escalates into a dispute as to whose
opinion is right. When the dispute is not resolved
through the logic of argument, the illogic of might tends
to enter the realm of right , sometimes resulting in
violent conflict.

Alignment does not require agreement as a necessary
condition. Alignment as congruence of intention is
congruence of resolution for the attainment of a
particular aim. An aim being in and of the future,
unknown or unpredicted variables inevitably enter the
generative equations for its achievement. Inherent in
alignment, therefore, is the spirit of quest.

The spirit of quest generates open and evolving
dialogue-in-action. Participants of a quest bring in
diverse points of view while remaining united in the
same quest. When they jointly choose a course of
action, they know that the choice is a tentative mutual
agreement, to be modified, altered, or even discarded
along the way. The question is not “who is right” but
“what is best” for the fulfillment of the intention.


Alignment engenders synergy. 


Following R. Buckminster Fullerʹs definition, synergy means
behaviors of whole systems unpredicted by behaviors
of their subsystems taken separately and observed
apart from the whole.(1) When individuals are aligned
in quest, their collective intelligence often produces
results that are beyond the intelligence of any single
individual. Although the locus of thinking always
remains within the individual, the synergetic impact of
the thinking of others takes the individual beyond the
normal mode and boundary of his or her thinking.

Intelligence follows intention. Aligned intention creates
a synergetic field of spiritual coherence that works as a
conduit for enhanced intelligence and empowered
action beyond the usual limitation of the individual.
This explains in part the occurrence of concentrated
upsurges of phenomenally creative geniuses in certain
epochs in history, such as the ancient Greek
civilization, the Renaissance, and the Enlightenment.

In an alignment-based organization or movement,
disagreement among participants does not diminish
but rather enhances the power of the alignment and its
synergetic impact. Plurality and diversity of ideas and
views, united in a shared intention, mutually enrich
one another toward the achievement of an end. In an
agreement-based organization or movement, on the
other hand, disagreement among participants often
leads to internal strife, divisive politics, splitting into
cliques, or eventual demise.

An agreement-based organization can transform itself
to an alignment-based organization by shifting its
value focus from agreement to alignment, from opinion
to intention. Alignment is not a static state; it is a
dynamic process of constant aligning and realigning in
the continual movement of time through the timeless
commitment to an intention.

People who differ in their opinions can align in their
intentions. No more do we need the usual politics of
opinion-domination, which is subverting the very
integrity of human-unity. What we need instead is a
new politics of intention-alignment, which is a cocreative
art of peaceful and mutually contributory coexistence
of people and nations through alignment
beyond agreement or disagreement."
(http://via-visioninaction.org/via-li/articles/Alignment_Beyond_Agreement.pdf)


=Source=

Alignment Beyond Agreement. Excerpted from The Journal of Integral Thinking for Visionary Action, Vol. One No. Four 2003

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Intelligence]]