'''Alive in Bagdhad''' = Creative Commons-licensed collective documentary


URL = http://www.aliveinbaghdad.org/


=Description=

"Alive in Baghdad was formed with the intent of making the world, and particularly the United States, aware of the Iraqi experience. The body of media available thus far has at best personalized and made comprehensible the occupation force, and at worst, otherized the Iraqis, classifying them as terrorists and encouraging Americans to ask the misleading question “Why do they hate us"? Instead Alive in Baghdad will encourage Westerners to ask questions about the similarity of life between working Americans and working Iraqis, to wonder about the strength of resolve it takes to continue supporting your family against all odds under occupation. We will encounter those who do not join the resistance despite the lack of any viable employment and survival in a manner that remains neutral to the occupation, as well as those who feel the resistance or the occupation are the only options.

'''Creative Commons''': Alive in Baghdad will be operating under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike License. We believe that by making all of the media created by the project free for distribution, editing, and re-use, we can ensure that the widest audience is able to see this alternative view from Iraq. All media will be hosted by infotage.net and downloadable via Bittorrent when Brian returns from Iraq. It is the Creative Commons element that is one of the main purposes for this journey to Iraq. Many great filmmakers have travelled to Iraq, but because their footage is not available online in raw format for wide distribution, we feel they are not making the impact they could. The Alive in Baghdad Project cannot hope to have the reach of CNN or FoxNews by itself, but we feel that Creative Commons licensing is the best solution to that. It is our hope that if editors and community members around the US and the world have access to this footage they will take it and use it to tell the Iraqis’ stories widely within their communities and amongst their families."
(http://www.aliveinbaghdad.org/)


[[Category:Webcasts]]