

'''=  mapping financial innovation'''


URL = http://allstreet.org/


=Description=

"All Street, the new Wall Street with no Walls, is a non-profit organization that seeks to bring thought leadership and clarity to the fast developing and increasingly complex financial innovation space.  The Open Book of Financial Innovation, the current main project, is about the many ways in which financial innovation is creating effective solutions to address the current economic and social challenges. The book is designed to co-create the financial innovation knowledge space and capture the main innovation efforts across the globe. Several main financial innovation islands will be explored such as Environmental Finance, Social Finance, Islamic Finance, Peer to Peer banking, Bottom of the Pyramid/Alternative finance, Microfinance, Capital Markets, Health, Housing and Retirement Finance."


=Discussion=

"Our Mission is to support the development of our society by sharing knowledge about new forms of finance.

All Street Foundation is a not for profit organization that seeks to bring thought leadership and clarity to the fast developing and increasingly complex alternative finance space.

Our aim is to work together to educate everyone from merchants and consumers to lawmakers about the possibilities, challenges and future of alternative finance.

We want to provide to every individual the right to both seek and receive information from all points of view without restriction. All Street is committed to give free access of all expressions of ideas through which any and all sides of a question, cause or solution may be explored. We want to make visible the roadmap of financial system change and transformation.

Our Strategic Goal is to give a voice to a whole generation of leaders to make people’s financial life better by providing easy, democratic access to the inside track of financial knowledge.

We believe that the impact of education and access to knowledge is the key to unlocking the potential of alternative finance. Often, efforts that are based on new ways of thinking are either ignored, misperceived or even invisible. It takes time, attention and a consistent focus for people to see them for what they are: examples of what’s possible, of what our new financial world could be like.

The financial industry is undergoing a fundamental reconfiguration, moving away from the current model of vertically-integrated monoliths towards a financial ecosystem of firms. We want to bridge this transition through knowledge creation and dissemination given the significant social and economic implications of the new forms of finance."
(http://allstreet.org/about-us)


[[Category:Peerfunding]]

[[Category:Money]]

[[Category:Resources]]