'''= expert on [[Community Economics]]'''

==Bio==

Self-employed author focusing upon intentional community and other applications of time-based economics, creating a school-of-thought termed "intentioneering," explaining the monetary or debt-based economies of exchanging and taking as co-evolving along with time-based or non-monetary economies of labor-gifting and labor-sharing, not in conflict, instead as two inter-dependent, synergistic, parallel cultures.


'''Long:'''

"Allen is a prolific writer about intentional communities. He may be best known for his in-depth analyses, which have included some interesting visualizations for understanding Intentional Communities on several different dimensions.

He has written a series of resource booklets for understanding and developing intentional community - many of which can now be found in different formats at his website, http://www.culturemagic.org.

In the early '80s, Allen was a board member of the New Destiny Food Cooperative Federation and New Life Farm. He was also a board member of the Fellowship for Intentional Community during the period of expansion from regional to continental organizing. He served as Treasurer of the School of Living Community Land Trust. Allen lived at East Wind and Twin Oaks communities for 12 years, becoming a student of comparative economic systems in intentional communities. Allen was treasurer for the Cohousing Association of the Rocky Mountains during its expansion from a regional to a national association, now called Coho/US.

Allen now lives in Denver, Colorado."

==Publications==

# 1997. [[Time-Based Economics]]: A Community Building Dynamic. Self-published.
# 1999. Intentioneering the Parallel Culture. Self-published.
# 2001. Geonomics and Community Power: The Enironmental and Public Benefits of Taxing Unearned Income. Self-published.
# 2001, revised 2004. Light and Shadows: Interpersonal and Group Process in the Sharing Lifestyle. Self-published.
# 2003. “[[Communal Economics]].” Encyclopedia of Community: From the Village to the Virtual World. Christensen, Karen and David Levinson (editors). Sage Publications.
# 2005, May. ÉLAN: Equity-Linked Affinity Network. Self-published.
# 2005, August. Mass Movement Manual: Shared Leadership in our Time of Change. Self-published.
# 2006. Landed Rainbow: An Allegory Presenting Lifestyles of Gifting and Sharing. Self-published.
# 2007. Gifting and Sharing: Living the Plenty Paradigm in Cohousing and Communal Society. Self-published.

==More Information==
* [[Allen Butcher on Allocation Mechanisms for Community Economics]]
* [[Balancing Individualism and Communitarianism]]
* [[Communal Distribution]]
* [[Communal Economics]]
* [[Communitarian Theory]]
* [[Egalitarian Commonwealth]]
* [[Equity Sharing]]
* [[Material Spirituality]]
* [[Ownership Control Matrix]]
* [[Plenty Paradigm]]
* [[Rational Altruism]]
* [[Scarcity Paradigm]]
* [[Time-Based Economics]]

* [https://www.ic.org/wiki/allen-butcher/ profile on ic.org]
* http://www.culturemagic.org
* http://www.Intentioneers.net
* contact via 4thworld@consultant.com



[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Economics]]

[[Category:Relational]]

[[Category:Community Economics]]

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]