

=Discussion=

From an overview by the Maryknoll Office for Global Concerns:


"Many small and medium-sized businesses have a difcult time raising money, as they
are too small to attract large investors, yet also too big for other sources such as
family and friends. The Small Business Administration (SBA) estimates that the
aggregate amount needed by businesses seeking between $250,000 and $5 million to
be $60 billion. The problem is so common that the SBA created a term, “capital chasm”
to describe it. Increasingly, these businesses are using the Internet to sell shares of
ownership directly to investors without the aid of an investment bank or broker that
charge massive fees and are rarely interested in financing smaller enterprises.
For investors, a direct public ofering means that more of their investment goes
directly to the business instead of being siphoned of by an investment bank and as
they are buying public shares, they can pull out of the investment at any time by
selling their shares. Cutting Edge Capital lists a number of entities that facilitate direct
public oferings.


==Evergreen Direct Investment Method==

Capital Institute founder John Fullerton, the former JP Morgan executive, notes that
conscientious investors in the responsible investing movement “seeking to embed
environmental, social and governance values (ESG) into their investment decisionmaking
are hamstrung by the investment method chosen. Specifically, trying to apply
ESG to what is inherently a speculative stock valuations game often feels like pushing
on a string. Without conscious awareness, we have confused speculation for
investment.”

The Capital Institute proposes the Evergreen Direct Investment Method in which
institutional investors like foundations and pension funds can build long-term
relationships with enterprises that express their values and “can achieve attractive and
resilient long-term financial returns that match their liabilities, while directly
embedding ESG values into negotiated investment partnerships.” The method
envisions, “stewardship-minded investors negotiating direct relationships with
corporate management with an explicit requirement to build long-term environmental,
social and governance values and parameters into the enterprise capital investment
process, even if it entailed some short-term negative consequences.” The advantage is
that investors can have a real say in the actions of a company while providing “stable
cash flows of mature, slow- or no-growth business enterprises that the valuationsgame-driven
speculators leave on the trash heap.”


==Slow Money==
Slow Money is a movement that aims to “bring money back down to earth” by helping
investors to “invest as if food, farms and fertility mattered.” They do this by connecting
investors to small food enterprises throughout the U.S. From farm cooperatives to
urban agriculture enterprises to manure farms and more, Slow Money has helped
funnel over $40 million into more than 400 small farm eforts around the country.


==Community and faith-based development investing==

Another alternative to placing valued savings into the financial markets is to invest in
community and faith-based development organizations that support local eforts to
provide afordable housing, jobs and economic development, especially in low-income
communities. These forms of investments provide an alternative rooted in the social
justice values promoted by faith traditions.

The Mennonite Church USA established a stewardship agency called Everence that
provides financial products and services that are aligned with their founding values.
They have developed two programs for community investing: mPower, which provides
funding for international microfinance organizations; and nSpire, which supports faithbased
community development projects throughout the United States. The World
Council of Churches established Oikocredit in 1968 to provide an ethical investment
channel for churches and related organizations to provide credit to enterprises that
support the disadvantaged. The Slow Money movement kindly provides a list of other
community investment opportunities as an alternative to large financial institutions.


==Church P2P lending==

Some churches are helping their members dig themselves out of debt through lowinterest
loans. The United Methodist Church created the Jubilee Assistance Fund
especially to help people unable to pay the exorbitant interest rates of payday lenders
and others who take advantage of people with low incomes. By providing much lower
interest loans, churches help their members avoid evictions, bankruptcies and other
financial woes. This fund is grounded in the scriptural text that the fiftieth year should
be a jubilee year when all debts are forgiven."
(http://www.maryknollogc.org/sites/default/files/encounters/attachments/Encounters6.pdf)


[[Category:Peerfunding]]