
Video via http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3PDHyUEIqrA&feature=player_embedded

=Description=

"An Xiao Mina is an American design strategist, researcher and artist. She focuses on the role of technology in building communities and empowering individuals.

She has shown her work in art and design spaces internationally, including the Brooklyn Museum, Yale/Haskins Laboratories, Shanghai's Xindanwei and the Pacific Asia Museum. Her work has been featured in numerous print and online publications, including The New York Times, The Guardian, Design Observer and Esquire Philippines.

In 2009, she co-founded a Chinese-to-English Twitter translation site with nearly 10,000 followers and a dozen contributing members, and she continues to head up @Platea, a social media-based performance art collective. She recently served on the curatorial team for Un-Named Design at the 2011 Gwangju Design Biennale, a collaboration with the Oslo School of Architecture and Beijing-based FAKE Design. The exhibition was named a best contemporary design show by the New York Times in 2011.

A guest lecturer at numerous venues around the world, including Yale, Pratt and Social Media Week New York, she speaks and writes extensively on creative uses of communications technology. Her writing, which covers issues affecting social media art, design for social impact, and the impact of new technologies, has appeared in Design Observer, Core77, PBS-affiliate Art21, the Brooklyn-based Hyperallergic and Esquire Philippines.

Originally from Silverlake (Los Angeles) and Manila, An has also lived in New York City, Beijing and Washington, DC. She tweets non-stop at @anxiaostudio and writes regularly about her work at www.anxiaostudio.com."
(http://personaldemocracy.com/media/internet-street-art-and-social-change-china)



[[Category:China]]

[[Category:Politics]]

[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Webcasts]]