
= Ana Méndez de Andés is architect and urban planner. She works mainly on the generation and occupation of the urban public space. She is founding member of the [[Observatorio Metropolitano]], areaciega and Car-tac.


=Bio=

"Ana Méndez de Andés is an architect and urban planner who has been working
as a landscape designer in Amsterdam, London and Madrid and is currently
teaching Urban Design at the Universidad Europea de Madrid. Her main field
of interest is the question of urban commons and the re-apropriation of
public space.

She is part of the collective Observatorio Metropolitano, a militant
research group that utilizes investigations and counter-mapping to look
into the metropolitan processes of precarious workers, migrants, and
militants taking place in Madrid, brought on by crisis, gentrification,
speculation and displacement. Ana collaborates with the publishing house,
bookshop, independent distribution and design project Traficantes de
Sueños and has also been involved in different projects regarding
collaborative mapping, urban commons and the conditions of production of
public space such as car-tac, areaciega, and urbanaccion; as well as
linked to organizing assemblies within the 15M-Acampada movement."
(http://thefutureofoccupy.org/2012/04/03/swarms-multitude-and-activism/)

In Spanish:

Ana Méndez de Andés es arquitecta urbanista. Trabaja principalmente sobre la generación y ocupación del espacio urbano. Es miembro fundador de las investigaciones del Observatorio Metropoliano y areaciega y del colectivo Car-tac.

=Links=

* Observatorio Metropolitano, http://www.observatoriometropolitano.org

* areaciega, http://www.areaciega.net/

* car-tac, http://citywiki.ugr.es/wiki/CARTAC


[[Category:Bios]]
[[Category:P2P Women]]
[[Category:Spain]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]

[[Category:Commons]]