'''* Report: Analysis of Financial Terrorism in America. David DeGraw. 2011'''

URL = http://ampedstatus.org/Analysis-of-Financial-Terrorism-in-America.pdf

The following report includes adapted excerpts from David DeGraw’s book, “The Road Through 2012: Revolution or World War III.” Release Date: 9.28.11


=Abstract=

"Despite increasing personal financial hardship, most Americans remain unaware of the
economic world war currently unfolding. An all-pervasive corporate and government
propaganda campaign has effectively obscured this blatant reality. After extensive
analysis, it is evident that World War III is a war between the richest one-tenth of one
percent of the global population and 99.9 percent of humanity. Or, as I have called it, The
[[Economic Elite Vs. The People]]. This war has been a one-sided attack thus far. However,
as we have seen throughout the world in recent months, the people are beginning to fight
back. The following report is a statistical analysis of the systemic economic attacks
against the American people."


=Contents=

==Part One :: The Economic Devastation==

* I :: Poverty
* II :: Food Insecurity
* III :: Unemployment
* IV :: Declining Income


==Part Two :: The Economic Elite==

* V :: How Much Wealth Do The Economic Elite Have?
* VI :: Who Rules America? Revealing The Economic Top 0.1%
* VII :: Tax Breaks For The Rich, Budget Cuts For The Rest Of Us


==Part Three :: The Perfect Storm Overhead==

(Inequality = Debt = Austerity = Civil Unrest = Inflation + Deflation = Stagflation)

* VIII :: Debt Slavery
* IX :: Inflation
* X :: The Beaten Masses


==Part Four :: Fascism in America==

* XI :: Modern Day Slavery
* XII :: The Death Toll
* XIII :: Deliberate Systemic Attacks


=More Information=

* [[AmpedStatus Network]]



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:OccupyWallStreet]]

[[Category:Economics]]