
* Book: Ancient Wisdom and Modern Misconceptions. A Critique of Contemporary Scientism. by Wolfgang Smith. Angelico Press,

URL =


=Description=

"For many years, Wolfgang Smith has been putting forward an expansive vision of the traditional Christian cosmos alongside an incisive critique of the truncated perspective of contemporary scientism. In Ancient Wisdom and Modern Misconceptions he shows how the physical sciences, freed from the prevailing misconceptions, actually corroborate the traditional wisdom long thought to be dead. Basing himself in part upon epistemological considerations first enunciated by Sir Arthur Eddington, which have recently received definitive confirmation, he shows that the so-called physical universe proves finally to be constructed by the strategies of the experimental physicist himself. Following this he delves into the foundations of astrophysics and planetary astronomy to arrive again at conclusions that fly in the face of current belief. After elucidating the concepts of Intelligent Design and vertical causation, he concludes by showing that the contemporary debate concerning Anthropic Coincidence is vitiated by an inversion of the causal nexus. With equal mastery Smith presents the serious reader with glimpses of the perennial wisdom eclipsed since the Enlightenment, and shows that traditional cosmology, so far from being disqualified, actually provides the keys to an understanding of science itself. No one entering the fray of current debates regarding “science and religion” can afford to neglect the immense implications of this work by Wolfgang Smith."

(https://www.angelicopress.org/ancient-wisdom-and-modern-misconceptions-smith)

[[Category:Civilizational Analysis]]