
'''Andrew Lih is an expert on participatory journalism and networked collaboration, who is very active in the Wikipedia community, preparing a book about its peer governance models.'''

Here's a bio from http://jmsc.hku.hk/faculty/alih/

"Andrew Lih's research interests include the development of open content and collaborative efforts in journalism. Wikis and web logs have allowed many more netizens to be producers of content and not simply browsers of the Internet. This will have an increasingly important role in China's media ecology, as it becomes the largest mobile phone and Internet market in the world.

He has been a commentator on new media, technology and journalism issues on CNN, BBC radio, MSNBC and NPR.

History

From 1995 to 2000, he created the new media program at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism where he served as adjunct professor and director of technology for their Center for New Media. In 2000, he formed the Interactive Design Lab at Columbia, which was a collaboration with the School of the Arts to investigate interactive design issues for fiction and nonfiction multimedia content. During its three years, the IDL analyzed the process of multimedia design in a variety of industries such as advertising, news, documentary and film. The IDL also worked very closely with the university’s new interdisciplinary communications Ph.D. program.

From 1990 to 1993 Mr. Lih worked for AT&T Bell Laboratories in user interface design and software systems. In 1994 he helped form one of the first dot-com startups in New York City, Mediabridge Infosystems, which created an online city guide to the Big Apple and performed content strategy for media firms in New York.

While at Columbia, he oversaw the online design and presence for the Pulitzer Prizes, Dupont Awards and the Columbia Journalism Review.

Publications

 - Wikipedia and Participatory Journalism, at http://www.rthk.org.hk/mediadigest/20040316_76_119814.html

[[Category:Bios]]