
= a Swedish ECC2013 Participant

=Bio=

"Anna Seravalli (anna.seravalli@mah.se): I am a design researcher based at MEDEA Malmö University (Sweden). My work focuses on how commons-based organizations could be used as a platform for prototyping alternative ways of generating goods and delivering services. My research is based on a long-term involvement in Fabriken, a maker-space in Malmö. I am looking forward for ECC to discuss possibilities and limits of commons-based organizations and commons-based production."

'''long bio:'''

"Anna Seravalli (anna.seravalli@mah.se): I am a design researcher with a background in industrial and service design. I am based at MEDEA Malmö University (Sweden) where I am part of the Malmö Living Labs. By involving diverse stakeholders in the city (citizens, companies, NGOs, civil servants) the labs experiment with the possibility of a wider participation in the production processes of goods and public services. Specifically, my work is based on the long-term involvement in the setting up and running of Living Lab Fabriken, a maker-space: a public workshop where, through shared tools and skills, diverse forms of production are opened up and explored. 

In my research, I am accounting for the different production practices emerging in the space (do-it-yourself, crafts, commons-based production, small-scale production, symbiotic production) trying to understand how they could represent seeds for a more socially and environmentally sustainable production system. I am also focusing on Fabriken as an example of commons-based organization, where participants are sharing tools, facilities and knowledge, as well as being involved in the management of the space. I am interested in deepening how commons-based patterns in production and organizations could support the emergence of a more resilient society and what kind of design strategies and tactics can be put in place for their development."


=Publications=

Via [http://prototypingalternativefutures.wordpress.com/materials/]:

Seravalli A. (2011)Democratizing production: challenges in co-designing enabling platforms for social innovation, The Tao of Sustainability, Sustainable Design Strategies in a Global Context, Bejing ChinaHillgren 

P-A, Seravalli A., Emilson A. (2011) Prototyping and infrastructuring in design for social innovation, Co-Design International Journal of CoCreation in Design and Art

Seravalli A.(2012) Building Fabriken: design for socially shaped Innovation, DRS Conference, Bangkok, Thailand

Seravalli A.(2012) From participatory design to participatory making?, Participatory Design Conference, Roskilde, Denmark

Seravalli A. (2010) EcCoLo, catalizzatore territoriale in Corrado F. Porcellana V. (ed.) Alpi e ricerca. Proposte e progetti per i territori alpini,  Franco Angeli, Torino, 2010.





[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Sweden]]

[[Category:Manufacturing]] 

[[Category:ECC2013 Participants]]