

=Text=

Dear friends,

This is an important announcement.

We probably won't give more details than this, though some formal statement in our blog may be forthcoming.

A sister organisation and the p2p foundation were victims of two 'psy-ops' that came in the form of forgeries and intrusion that resulted in the blocking and email deletions of strategic relationships in both skype and gmail. What had seemed communication flukes turned out to be willful disruptions. It seems that at least since December last year my gmail box has bee n manipulated (this is not a figment of our imagination, it's documented), resulting in serious harm.

It seems the mailboxes are now safe, though I may eventually switch more systematically to p2pfoundation1@gmail.com.

In the meantime, if you feel certain crucial communications were not replied to, feel free to resend,

We need a lot more support to get through trials like this, in terms of technical help from hackers, financial assistance to do our work in better circumstances, and help to continue build our knowledge commons!! Now is a good time to consider helping us and joining our community of contributors.

Anyone interested in making a donation can do so here: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/donate

To see if you're one of the 50+ people or organisations that has been affected, please check here: [[Email Filter List]]

Michel Bauwens


=More Information=

see for an update, the join statement here:

* [[Statement of Separation with Franco Iacomella]]


=Reactions=

==Michael L. Hartsell==

Dear Friends, 

I have participated in the internal investigation at P2P, and have been made aware of the external, private investigation and the evidence produced from the online investigator. To say the obvious, Michel Bauwens has worked diligently to serve the various communities and the people with whom he interacts. He works with intelligence and compassion and has a rare ability to make true connections with people around the globe. It is sad to see this attack on the P2P Foundation and on Bauwens' endeavors to work for a better society for all. In this spirit, the same goes for the others at the Commons Strategies, the Right Livelihood Award Group, FLACSO, and Via Libre.

I hope that a speedy resolution can be brought about and these innovative individuals can get back to the work they do best.

In solidarity and concern,

Layne Hartsell