
=Description=

Knut Wimberger:

"Anomie is	usually	translated	as	normlessness,	but	it	best	understood	as	insufficient	
normative	regulation.	During	periods	of	rapid	social	change,	individuals	sometimes	
experience	alienation	from	group	goals	and	values.	They	lose	sight	of	their	shared	interests	
based	on	mutual	dependence.	In	this	condition,	they	are	less	constrained	by	group	norms.	
Normative	values	become	generalized,	rather	than	personally	embraced.

Psychologist	Martin	Seligman,	the	founding	father	of	modern	positive	psychology,	writes	
that	most	of	the	developed	world,	is	experiencing	an	unprecedented	epidemic	of	depression	–
particularly	among	young	people.	Why	is	it	that	in	a	nation	that	has	more	money,	more	
power,	more	records,	more	books,	and	more	education,	that	depression	should	be	so	much	
more	prevalent	than	it	was	when	the	nation	was	less	prosperous	and	less	powerful?
He	concludes	with	his	own	definition	of	anomie:	Depression	is	a	disorder	of	the	“I”,	failing	in	
your	own	eyes	relative	to	your	goals.	In	a	society	in	which	individualism	is	becoming	rampant,	
people	more	and	more	believe	that	they	are	the	center	of	the	world.	Such	a	belief	system	
makes	individuals	failure	almost	inconsolable.	Individual	failure	used	to	be	buffered	by	the	
second	large	force,	the	large	“we”.	When	our	grandparents	failed,	they	had	comfortable	
spiritual	furniture	to	rest	in.	They	had,	for	the most	part,	their	relationship	to	God,	their	
relationship	to	a	nation	they	loved,	their	relationship	to	a	community	and	a	large	extended	
family.	Faith	in	God,	community,	nation,	and	the	large	extended	family	have	all	eroded	in	the	
last	forty	years,	and	the spiritual	furniture	that	we	used	to	sit	in	has	become	threadbare."

(https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340023596)


[[Category:Relational]]