=Discussion=

Marcus Lindholm:

"Through such local modes of common self-regulation, new kinds of ecosystems emerged,  now  known  as  '''cultural  landscapes'''  (Taylor,  2012).  In  Europe  these  landscapes consisted of mosaics of pasture, arable land, and settlements, mixed up  with  ditches,  mires,  ponds,  rocky  hills  and  tree  groves.  Lacking  modern  technology, the reworking of the environment was shallow, with minor impact on bedrock and waterways. The result was a heterogenization of landscape features which substantially increased local biodiversity (Suchantke, 1993; Vos & Meekes, 1999).  Large  parts  of  eastern  Asia  are  dominated  by  cultural  landscapes,  now  partly populated by species that solely occur in these environments (gingko, rock dove).  Other  regions  have  been  extensively  cultivated  by  means  of  terraced  wetlands  for  rice,  taro,  and  other  crops,  in  close  interaction  with  aquatic  and  semiaquatic  flora  and  fauna  elements  (Bhattacharya,  2014).  Large  areas  of  the  semi-arid  Irano-Anatolian  region  was  altered  into  open  oak-grassland  cultural  landscapes already during early Holocene (Asouti & Kabukcu, 2014). In the high Andes,   pre-Colombian   cultural   landscapes   dominated   large   areas,   and   substantial parts of the Amazon rain forests are old cultural landscapes, as well (Heckenberger et al., 2007; Solomon et al., 2007), as confirmed by the widespread occurrence of manmade black soil (terra preta). The Maya culture, which persisted through  millennia,  rested  on  an  intriguing  system  of  agriculture  and  forestry,  making up complex cultural landscapes from wetlands to alpine zones (Beach et al.,  2019).  African  woodlands  are  partly  afforested  cultural  landscapes,  as  well  (Fairhead  &  Leach,  1996),  and  aborigines  of  Australia  controlled  bush  fires  to  promote  certain  grasses  and  edible  plants  along  their  trails,  altering  game  densities and reshaping vegetation patterns (Silock, 2018). Even presently, loss of diversity is shown to be lower in areas managed by traditional cultures (IPBES report, 2019).The term 'ecological footprint' gained new meaning as premodern cultures created  a  broad  range  of  man-made soil types, '''anthrosol'''s. Enriched by manure, charcoal,  ashes,  and  compost,  anthrosols  still  dominate  substantial  areas  of  the  Eastern  and  Western  Palearctic  and  tropical  Nearctic,  partly  reaching  back  to  early Holocene (Gong et al., 1999; Lehmann et al., 2003). The soil in which we presently put our ecological footprints, are by large created by our own ancestors. These  man-landscape  interfaces  enhanced  local  biodiversity  and  habitat  heterogeneity.  Half  of  the  flowering  plants  of  northern  Europe  are  introduced  from southern latitudes by man or gained increased distribution due to human culture –   among  them  many  herbs  now  ubiquitous,  such  as  dandelion,  nettle,  ground elder, and coltsfoot. The emergence of a diverse flowering vegetation in turn,  boosted  the  insect  fauna.  Bumble  bee  diversity  of  Britain  is  intimately  associated  with  cultural  landscapes  (Carvell  et  al.,  2007),  and  caterpillars  of  numerous  common  butterflies  depend  on  herbs  and  flowering  plants  of  the  cultural landscape. Even the tortoiseshell or the peacock, now common in alpine environments  seemingly  unaffected  by  humans,  are  leftovers  from  premodern  cultural  landscapes,  where  grazing  livestock  delivered  the  manure  crucial  for  nettles, which is the only plant their larvae feed on. The abundance and diversity of  dung  beetles,  several  of  which  presently  red-listed,  is  likewise  an  effect  of  livestock grazing in outfield (Hanski & Cambefort, 1991). The enhanced diversity of insects favored a corresponding increase in bird diversity (Pedersen & Krøgli, 2017)."

(https://cosmosandhistory.org/index.php/journal/article/view/1004/1657)


=More information=

* [[Regulatory Function of Resource Limitation as a Bio-Cultural Framework for Humanity]]

[[Category:Ecology]]