

=Discussion=

==The origins of anthropomorphic thinking==

CHRIS KNIGHT and CAMILLA POWER:

"Steven Mithen and Pascal Boyer (J. Roy. anthrop. Inst.
(N.S.) 2, 717-21) disagree over the naturalness of
anthropomorphic thinking. According to Mithen,
anatomically modem humans, unlike archaics such
as the Neanderthals, display ‘cognitive fluidity’,
such that the specialized neural circuitry for
‘understanding of the natural world’ draws
spontaneously on the ‘social intelligence’ module
and vice versa. One result is that hunter-gathers
intuitively attribute ‘theory of mind’ to animals,
empathizing with hunted species as if they were
human kin – the essence of ‘totemism’.

For Mithen, then, it is cognitively intuitive or
‘natural’ for Homo sapiens sapiens to generate and
transmit therianthropic representations – as exemplified in the early Aurignacian ivory statuette of
a man’s body with a lion’s head from HohlensteinStadel in southern Germany. This notion of
naturalness is unacceptable to Boyer, who has
invested much theoretical labour in establishing the
reverse position. 


Referring to human/animal
composites and comparable ‘cultural representations
which violate intuitive principles’, Boyer writes:


- ‘These are not part of evolved intuitive ontology but
quite the opposite’ (p. 720). 

It is precisely the
counter-intuitive, surprising and hence attentiongrabbing nature of therianthropes and other
inhabitants of the spiritual domain – their systematic
violation of natural cognitive expectations – which
in Boyer’s view accounts for their impact,
memorability and hence success in cultural
transmission."
(http://radicalanthropologygroup.org/sites/default/files/pdf/class_text_064.pdf)

[[Category:Intelligence]]