'''* Article: Anti-Racist Technoscience:: A Generative Tradition. By Ron Eglash. September 2019. In book: Eglash, R. (2019). “Anti-racist technoscience: a generative Captivating Technology: Race, Carceral Technoscience, and Liberatory Imagination in Everyday LifePublisher: Duke University Press ; DOI: 10.1215/9781478004493-014'''

URL = https://www.researchgate.net/publication/335569316_Anti-Racist_Technoscience_A_Generative_Tradition?

== Abstract ==

"Using two case studies I map out intellectual genealogies in which generative frameworks—portraits of life’s flourishing as open, hybridizing, and self-transforming—emerged in the exchanges between anti-racists and the scientific community. The first case is a detailed look at the exchanges between abolitionists and scientists: Frederick Douglass, Henry Bowditch, Charles Darwin, and others. Here a generative framework emerges as an alternative to racist portraits of fixed order in biology, as well as an alternative to the fixed order of segregation and cultural purity. The second case is a comparison with the open-ended sympoiesis in Native American agroecologies, and the first emergence of a movement to decolonize diets. We will end with a brief look a generative frameworks in science/activist alliances today. Together these cases can illuminate the reasons why open-ended hybridity, not closed-loop purity, is key to understanding the possible paths to a world based on generative justice."

[[Category:Race]]
[[Category:Protocols and Algorithms]]
[[Category:Articles]]
[[Category:Technology]]
[[Category:Science]]
[[Category:Identity Politics]]