'''= Article: Anticapture, Towards a Framework of Capture-Resistant Governance'''

URL = https://spengrah.mirror.xyz/f6bZ6cPxJpP-4K_NB7JcjbU0XblJcaf7kVLD75dOYRQ


=Description=

"This article introduces Anticapture, a framework for understanding capture-resistant governance. Anticapture seeks to understand the fundamentals of capture-resistant governance by examining how organizations – modeled as networks of agents – take actions to manage resources in service of their objectives.

By the time you’re finished reading, you’ll be equipped with the beginnings of a taxonomy and a set of terminology to use in the context of DAOs, decentralized communities, and capture-resistant governance."


=Discussion=

==The [[DAO As Anticapture Mechanism]]==

Spenrath:

"With the Anticapture framework in hand, '''we can conceptualize DAOs as a strong form of capture-resistant governance'''. In a sense, this means that DAOs inherit the basic properties of the parent class of capture-resistant governance. Like any instantiation of capture-resistant governance, DAOs are networks of agents, they manage shared resources, and they have a purpose.

A DAO’s purpose does not need to be explicit, and a DAO might have more than one purpose. Indeed, a DAO’s purpose(s) might even emerge from varied motivations of the agents in its network. To say that a DAO has purpose is simply to say that it acts with intent.

Finally, like other forms of capture-resistant governance, DAOs protect their resources to some degree from capture.

'''What distinguishes DAOs from those other forms is how and how strongly DAOs resist capture.''' Specifically, DAOs are resistant to capture at the most vulnerable point: the Execute phase (as explained above) — the point where a network takes actions over their shared resources.

When DAOs take actions that impact or leverage their shared resources, the execution of those actions occurs in both a decentralized and autonomous fashion. The decentralized aspect of the execution requires that all agents in the network share the power to execute actions, and is how DAOs primarily resist capture by internal agents. On the other hand, the autonomous aspect of the execution requires that no agents outside the network have power to execute – or alter – the DAO’s actions, and is how DAOs primarily resist capture by external agents.

Putting it all together, we can summarize as a single-sentence definition of a DAO:

'''A DAO is a network of agents who share common purpose, and are the only ones who hold the power to execute actions that manage a set of shared resources".'''

(https://spengrah.mirror.xyz/f6bZ6cPxJpP-4K_NB7JcjbU0XblJcaf7kVLD75dOYRQ)


[[Category:Crypto Governance]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]
[[Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory]]
[[Category:Articles]]