
* Excellent introductory article mentioning both sides of the debate as well as the dangers and benefits related to this legislation, here at https://www.thefire.org/13-important-points-in-the-campus-k-12-critical-race-theory-debate/


=Contextual Citation=

"Proponents of these bills need to realize that they can’t legislate these ideas out of existence, and that the more egregious bills are not only unconstitutional and thus totally futile, but throw fuel on an already raging culture war fire. Opponents of these bills need to read the bills and be honest about what’s actually in them and recognize that their opponents are motivated by something other than a desire to hide the true history of slavery."

- Greg Lukianoff et al. [https://www.thefire.org/13-important-points-in-the-campus-k-12-critical-race-theory-debate/]


=Example=

"For example, [https://www.ncleg.gov/Sessions/2021/Bills/House/PDF/H324v4.pdf North Carolina’s HB 324], mentioned above, prohibits public K-12 schools from “promoting” the following concepts:

(1) One race or sex is inherently superior to another race or sex.

(2) An individual, solely by virtue of his or her race or sex, is inherently racist, sexist, or oppressive, whether consciously or unconsciously.

(3) An individual should be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment solely or partly because of his or her race or sex.

(4) An individual’s moral character is necessarily determined by his or her race or sex.

(5) An individual, solely by virtue of his or her race or sex, bears responsibility for actions committed in the past by other members of the same race or sex.

(6) Any individual, solely by virtue of his or her race or sex, should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish, or any other form of psychological distress. […] "
(https://www.thefire.org/13-important-points-in-the-campus-k-12-critical-race-theory-debate/)

=Cases=

Greg Lukianoff et al.:

(the cited article has links to each case mentioned here [https://www.thefire.org/13-important-points-in-the-campus-k-12-critical-race-theory-debate/] :

"These bills are a reaction to legitimately concerning documented cases of K-12 students being singled out due to their race and made to participate in exercises that are, arguably, racially discriminatory. I was disturbed to read some of the examples in my co-author — and FIRE colleague — Bonnie Snyder’s forthcoming book Undoctrinate: How Politicized Classrooms Harm Kids and Ruin Our Schools—And What We Can Do About It, such as:

* A biracial high school student in Las Vegas was allegedly singled out in class for his appearance and called derogatory names by his teacher. In a lawsuit, the student’s family alleges he was labelled an oppressor, told denying that status was “internalized privilege,” and told he needed to “unlearn” the Judeo-Christian principles imparted by his mother. 
* When he refused to complete certain “identity confession” assignments, the lawsuit claims, the school gave him a failing grade. He has had to attend counseling. 
* Third grade students in California were forced to analyze their racial and other “identities,” rank themselves according to their supposed “power and privilege,” and were informed that those in the “dominant” culture categories created and continue to maintain this culture to uphold power.
* Parents in North Carolina allege that middle school students were forced to stand up in class and apologize to other students for their “privilege.” 
* Buffalo public schools teach students that all white people perpetuate systemic racism and are guilty of implicit racial bias. 
* Elementary children at the Fieldston School in Manhattan were sorted by race for mandatory classroom exercises.  
* A head teacher in Manhattan was caught on tape acknowledging that the curriculum at his school teaches white students that they’re inherently “evil” and saying, “we’re demonizing white people for being born.” 

(https://www.thefire.org/13-important-points-in-the-campus-k-12-critical-race-theory-debate/)

[[Category:Identity Politics]]
[[Category:Education]]
[[Category:P2P Law]]