
'''= The ATC Library of Technological Criticism'''

URL = https://www.antitechcollective.com/copy-of-library

=Description=

By the Anti-Tech Collective:

"a collection of resources (mostly non-fictional writings) recommended by the community for their contribution to technological criticism.

If you are entirely unfamiliar with anti-tech ideas, this is a wonderful place to begin. We have attempted to curate the Library with self-learners in mind. This means that we have begun attempting to group and rank works according to our assessment of their ease of access, contribution to and influence on the overall discussion, their overall revolutionary value, and so on: in a word, their estimated essentiality for understanding the Technological Question and proposed solutions. To say that some works are less essential than others does not mean that nothing is gained in reading the 'less essential' works. We are viewing the most essential works as 'fire starters' and the less essential ones as progressively 'adding fuel to the fire'... in our opinion, of course.

​

Most of the items include notes or summaries written by current or past internal ATC members or the authors themselves to pique your interest and aid in your learning journey.

If you already have some familiarity with anti-tech thought, this library is still a wonderful resource for further developing and bolstering your understanding of the Technological Crisis. Other articles and essays, including mostly recent ones, not amounting to entire books are included in the "Further Readings" section under the main Library for those already familiar with basic AT theory. Links to active groups and websites beyond ATC but which are either anti-tech themselves or are amicable to anti-tech are found in the "External Resources" section.

​

If you, as a member of the community, have suggestions for inclusions to the library or if you have criticisms of the works already included, please share them with us by contacting ATC through antitechcollective@protonmail.com."

[[Category:P2P Technology Theory]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Books]]