

=Bio=

"Antonella is a registered architect, PhD in Urban Design and soundscape researcher, currently working on her post doc project “Beyond the Noise: Open Source Soundscapes” at the Technical University Berlin, as an IPODI-Marie Curie Fellow.
She also collaborates with the European Commission Executive Research Agency as an external expert evaluator in the frame of HORIZON 2020.

Antonella was trained as an architect and undertook doctoral studies in urban design at MIT (Cambridge, USA) and at the University of Firenze (IT). She also holds a Master Degree in Architectural and Environmental Acoustics from the University of Roma Tre (IT).
Her research and professional work has been widely awarded: most notably the IPODI-Marie Curie Fellowship for post-doc research at TU Berlin, the Rotary International Ambassadorial Scholarship for doctoral research at MIT, the 2010 National Institute of Urbanism Award for the best Italian dissertation in urbanism. Her last project, Toscana Sound Map, was commissioned for and exhibited at the EXPO 2015 in Milan. In 2012, she was invited to join the team who curated the exhibition held at the Italian Pavilion for the 13th International Architecture Exhibition – Venice Biennal.

Since 2009, she has been the curator of Firenze Sound Map included in the Open Data System of the Municipality of Firenze in 2013 by the means of the dataset “Immaterial Cultural Heritage”.

While combining her professional and research practice, Antonella has lectured extensively at the university level for ten years. She has also participated in international conferences and symposiums."
(http://www.opensourcesoundscapes.org/about/)

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Italy]]

[[Category:Urban Commons]]

[[Category:Bios]]