'''= Led by Oscar Spierenburg and a team of international developers, the project aims to produce “an affordable community driven free software and open hardware cinematic HD camera for a professional production environment”.''' 

URL = https://www.apertus.org/about [http://cinema.elphel.com/]

"Axiom will be the first ever Digital Cinema Camera designed with openness in mind.  It will also roll in well below 10 grand – a highly competitive price for cameras of its type." [https://opensourcehardwaregroup.com/the-apertus-axiom-camera-debuting-open-source-hardware-in-the-cinema/]


=Description=

'''1.'''

"The goal of the award winning apertus° project is to create free and open technology for todays professional cinema and film production landscape and make all the generated knowledge freely available. It all started with creating an open modular camera system consisting of several hardware and software parts using Elphel hardware. Now with the efforts to build the very first open digital cinema camera AXIOM from scratch the apertus° project has evolved to the next level: into a platform for film-makers, creative industry professionals, artists and enthusiasts. apertus° is more than just a software/hardware collection, it's a knowledge library, an ecosystem of people supporting each other and advocating freedom."
(https://www.apertus.org/about)


'''2.'''

"Apertus uses the Elphel free software and open hardware HD camera as its core component. Built by the Utah based Newonics Inc. electronics manufacturers, Elphel have been producing high performance cameras since 2001 releasing software and hardware design code under a GPL license. Community-led modifications and contributions to the development of Elphel camera equipment is rooted at the heart of production.

Apertus uses the Elphel 353, which consists of an Aptina CMOS bayer-pattern sensor with an optical format of 1/2.5″ (5.70mm x 4.28mm) and a native resolution of 2592×1944 (5 Megapixels). The camera is equipped with a standard C-mount lens fitting but ships with an adapter ring that can accommodate CS-lenses as well. The camera supports a range of resolutions and recording modes, including a RAW mode for an optimum quality/FPS ratio. 

One of the most interesting features is the camera’s connectivity, with the ability to connect to any external SATA device that is supported under a Linux operating system (external harddrives, raids, etc.); an Ethernet 100MBit Network; USB 1.1 using 5V power supply; IDE to connect to an internal hard drive; and RS232 for access to a console and debug output. The Elphel can record onto 2 internal CF Card Slots, an optional internal IDE 1.8″ HDD or via its SATA connector to any SATA device."
(http://osliving.com/sourced/real-world-open-source/meet-apertus-the-open-source-hd-cinema-camera/)


=More Information=

* [[Apertus Association]]

* [[Product Hacking]]

* Podcast: [http://traffic.libsyn.com/opensourcehardwaregroup/Apertus.mp3 Apertus Axiom Camera – Debuting Open Source Hardware in the Cinema]


[[Category:Media]]