
'''= “a web and mobile application that allows groups of dozens up to millions of people to communicate with the clarity, ease and coherence of a single person”.'''  [http://www.appgree.com/what-is-appgree/]

URL = http://www.appgree.com/


=Description=

'''1.'''

"Appgree is a new way of communicating that allows groups of any size to express themselves and, by this means, allows them to participate in many communication scenarios, their access to which hat not been possible. How does it do this? By enabling thousands or millions of people, brought together in a group, to come to an agreement on any subject, in just seconds.

With Appgree, an entire city can meet online and hold a clear, fast-moving dialogue with its mayor; a company’s management can quickly solve any product-related issue with its sales team; an association can discuss current issues in real time with its members; a brand can hear clearly what its customers have to say; the advocates of a social cause can organise themselves and understand what their priorities are, in just seconds…

Until now, if a large group tried to understand and express its members’ will, it always came up against an insurmountable obstacle: its size. With Appgree, the obstacle becomes the solution: at Appgree, the larger the group, the more potential it has to generate ideas that can gain a consistent consensus.

From now on, we will view groups as an extension of ourselves that gives us the power to achieve things that we cannot achieve alone."
(http://www.appgree.com/what-is-appgree/)


'''2.''' 

“With Appgree, a brand’s followers, members of an association and any type of community -a company’s department, a hikers club- is able to share their ideas, opinions and/or questions and reach a consensus in a matter of seconds, thanks to a simple yet extremely powerful statistics-based algorithm DemoRank.

Until now, if a large group tried to understand and express its members’ will, it always came up against an insurmountable obstacle: its size. With Appgree, the obstacle becomes the solution: at Appgree, the larger the group, the more potential it has to generate ideas that can gain a consistent consensus.”
(http://www.appgree.com/what-is-appgree/)

=More Information=

* DemoRank is at http://www.appgree.com/how-it-works/ 


[[Category:Facilitation]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Democracy]]