
'''* Book: APPLIED ELITE THEORY. Neema Parvini. Imperium Press, 2025.'''

URL = https://www.imperiumpress.org/shop/applied-elite-theory/

''"This book applies elite theory to American and British politics, offering a powerful and far-sighted view of the modern political landscape."''


=Description=

"In Applied Elite Theory, Neema Parvini brings the arguments of The Populist Delusion and The Prophets of Doom into direct confrontation with contemporary political reality. Drawing from over forty essays and speeches written between 2022 and 2025, Parvini tests the central claims of classical elite theory—derived from Mosca, Pareto, and Michels—against the tumult of present-day events in Britain, America, and beyond.

Parvini’s premise is simple: populism is the thickest of all delusions. Power never flows upward; it is always exercised by an organised minority, and every movement that forgets this truth is destined for capture. Across three sections, he shows this pattern repeating. In America, the populist wave surrounding Donald Trump succumbs to the “Iron Law of Oligarchy,” transforming from rebellion to empty formalism within a single political cycle. In Britain, Tony Blair’s enduring influence and the hollow collapse of the Conservative Party reveal an establishment that has survived every supposed change of regime. Throughout, Parvini’s tone is unsparing yet analytical, combining political realism with cultural diagnosis.

The collection also documents Parvini’s own evolution—from early engagement with the dissident right to a disillusioned realism that sees even online radicalism as a new form of containment. Written originally for his Substack The Forbidden Texts, his Chronicles column “Riding the Tiger,” and public lectures, these pieces gain new coherence in print: together they map a world in which ideology masks interest, elites recycle themselves beneath shifting symbols, and history vindicates the cynics of power.

Applied Elite Theory continues Parvini’s work on power, decline, and belief. If The Populist Delusion was theory and The Prophets of Doom history, this is practice—a guided tour through the politics of the 2020s, showing how elite theory predicts, explains, and perhaps forecloses on the hopes of populism itself."


[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:P2P Class Theory]]

[[Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory]]