

=Bio=

“April Rinne is a Sharing Economy enthusiast, evangelist and advocate. She loves catalyzing early conversations, forging partnerships, and helping others – individuals, companies, organizations and communities alike – to see the world in radically new ways.

Much of April’s career has focused on microfinance, law, policy, water, and social enterprise. The lessons she can apply from these experiences to the Sharing Economy are many: the role of social standing and reputation, management of common resources, and the importance of creating an enabling environment in which new business forms can thrive, to name but a few.

Within the Sharing Economy, April is particularly interested in legal and policy issues and international business development opportunities. As a Young Global Leader at the World Economic Forum, she leads the YGL Sharing Economy working group. This group is focused on identifying the key drivers, success factors and challenges to collaborative consumption models and trendspotting around what’s essential for them to go mainstream.

Alongside these pursuits, April is the Director of WaterCredit at Water.org. In this capacity she is responsible for developing global strategy related to financial innovation for water and sanitation at the bottom of the economic pyramid, leading expansion efforts, and promoting cross-sector partnerships and learning platforms.

April also serves on the Board of Directors of the World Wide Web Foundationand the Harvard Law and International Development Society (LIDS). She is a member of the Relationship Economy Expedition (REX), a think-and-do tank focused on navigating massive change and unleashing new sources of value.
Previously April was a private lawyer focusing on international corporate finance and microfinance-related transactions. She has also taught for the International Development Law Organization (IDLO) and advised social enterprises in a variety of sectors.

April regularly speaks and writes about a variety of topics, including access to finance, women and leadership, blended-value investment opportunities, and the "relationship economy" we now live in. Her related interests include corporate sustainability strategy, alternative currencies, responsible governance of the commons, and alternative ways to nurture talent.

April is a graduate of Harvard Law School, the Fletcher School, and Emory University, and is a Fulbright Scholar. She speaks fluent Italian, advanced Spanish and passable French. She enjoys running, hiking, cycling, photography, doing handstands, and being surrounded by nature. An inveterate adventurer, April has travelled to 83 countries at last count (next up: Rwanda, New Zealand and Myanmar).”
(http://www.shareable.net/users/aprilrinne)


=More Information=

You can reach April at april.rinne@gmail.com or follow her on Twitter @aprilrinne.


[[Category:Bios]]

[[Category:Sharing]]

[[Category:P2P Law]]