== Description ==

* [[Archmodernism]] as Stages of Social Evolution:

Stages of social evolution require multiple people co-existing with the same kind of sensibility. There are distinct stages of social evolution, each with their own sensibilities. They can can be shown to emerge in a historical sequence, but they can also describe sensibility characteristics of individuals, cultures, institutions, and societies coexisting today. With pre-modernism sensibilities, people primarily base their worldviews on religious notions. With modernism sensibilities, people primarily base their worldviews on scientific notions. With post-modernism sensibilities, people primarily base their worldview on something called structuralism, which means that people think all truths and knowledge are relative and situational. With metamodern sensibilities, people primarily base their worldviews on recognizing that all the previous sensibilities have positive and negative traits, and that we can carry the best of what came before us forward. 

We are introducing a new term, called archmodernism. Archmodernism is very new, and we don’t really have a lot of examples to observe about it. What we do know, is that it involves people who have authored or advocate for unification metatheories, all coordinating together towards a higher order synthesis of human knowing and doing, with the intention to understand, solve for, and overcome our local to global complex challenges in new ways. It means acknowledging that while previous sensibilities have solves problems from the previous social sensibility, they create new problems of their own, and that no previous sensibility has yet been able to implement the kind of changes our world needs at the scope and scale it requires."

(https://www.arc.voyage/research-lab)


== More Information ==
* [[Archdisciplinary Research Center]]

[[Category:P2P Theory]]
[[Category:Integral Theory]]