Arno Reuser is a professional librarian / information professional with more than 30 years experience in information handling and -processing. He founded and managed the Dutch Open Source Intelligence Bureau about 15 years ago and managed it until October 2010. Today, in conjunction with his activities for Reuser's Information Services he still holds a position as Senior Policy Advisor for OSINT at the ministry of Defence.

Arno is the world's only OSINT professional who as a trained information professional/librarian not only has a professional background in information processing and handling, but also has a long term background in intelligence.

Arno's expertise is to design and use systems that can translate information requirements into actionable intelligence. Or, in other words, finding pinpoint answers to questions, and to design and run training courses about this for government agencies, law enforcement and intelligence agencies. 

Arno holds a bachelor degree in librarianship and has completed many courses in digital information management, Internet search strategies, update workshops etc. He learned the technical requirements of today's digital world by learning how to write software, program scripts to automate tasks, building websites, getting the most out of the Internet by studying network theory, all in support of OSINT information management.

In the early nineties Arno learned about the Internet as an information source, long before the World Wide Web was invented and when Internet in The Netherlands did not exist yet. Since then, he learned about sources, about information validation, about establishing the reliability of information, about security, about what exactly happens when you send e-mail from one machine to the other and how this can be traced back.

In addition to his work with the Dutch Defence and Intelligence Service, the Service has granted Arno permission to establish Reuser’s Information Services in 2008 in conjunction with his current position. RIS’ primary goal is to teach Open Source Intelligence and provide consultancy for government and private sector institutions worldwide. Arno conducts these courses on behalf of RIS for clients worldwide. Occasionaly, he works togethe with IHS Janes to conduct the Open Source Intelligence Methods & Techniques training programme.

Arno has an extensive history of teaching OSINT, and OSINT training has been a core focus of his professional activities for decades. Today, he teaches OSINT, search strategies, information handling and security to a wide range of audiences with different backgrounds. He travels regularly to many countries inside and outside Europe to teach to a wide range of multilingual, multicultural audiences and is thus used to communicating with people from different backgrounds and possessing different language skills. Arno is a lecturer at the Universities of Amsterdam and Utrecht, he teaches at the Netherlands Defence Academy, Netherlands Institute of International Relations Clingendael. Arno ran a variety of courses and workshops for law enforcement agencies (national as well as international such as Europol, EULex and EuroJust), is invited regularly by police forces to lecture on OSINT and current issues like social networks.

In addition, Arno writes book chapters (OSINT for the Kluwer Intelligence Handbook), has published articles, was interviewed for journals and there is recently a podcast interview with Arno, recorded live, broadcasted in the Spy Museum in Washington DC. Arno also maintains a discussion list for librarians and information professionals with more then 1500 participants, he runs Reuser's New Repertorium with a annotated, systematically arranged listing of the best Internet sources, he wrote his own Internet search engine Isolde designed to use search strategies such as Building Blocks and Successive Factions, and he maintains the International Catalogue of Intelligence reports (to be published).

Arno was awarded a Golden Candle Award in 2003. He received a Lifetime Award in 2005. Arno was nominated for Information Professional of the Year 2010. 

Source of above (11 June 2015): http://www.reuser.biz/Website/AboutTheTeam.html

See Also:

[https://nl.linkedin.com/in/reuser / LinkedIn Arno Resuer]
[http://www.reuser.biz/Website/index.html / Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) @ Reuser's Information Services]

[[Category:Open Intelligence]]