

*Article: DIWO (Do-It-With-Others): Artistic co-creation as a decentralized method
of peer empowerment in today?s multitude. By Marc Garrett

URL = http://s.shr.lc/14BjgJ1


=Text=

Marc Garrett:

"Furtherfield originally created the term DIWO in 2006, to represent and
reflect its own involvement in a series of grass root explorations.

These critical engagements shift curatorial and thematic power away from
top-down initiations into co-produced, networked artistic activities; it
is now an international movement and it has grown into something much
larger than we imagined.

The practice of DIWO allows space for an openness where a rich mixing of
components from different sources crossover and build a hybrid
experience. It challenges and renegotiates the power roles between
artists and curators. It brings all actors to the fore, artists become
co-curators alongside the curators, and the curators themselves can also
be co-creators. The "source" materials are open to all; to remix,
re-edit and redistribute, either within a particular DIWO event or
project, or elsewhere. The process is as important as the outcome,
forming relationally aware peer enactments. It is a living art,
exploiting contemporary forms of digital and physical networks as a mode
of open praxis, as in the Greek word for doing, and as in, doing it with
others.

This study investigates why these critically engaged activities were
(and are) thought of as essential nourishment not only for "individual"
artists, but also as an effective form of artistic collaboration with
others, and to a wider culture. It explores the differences between
"collaborative" trends initiated by established art (mainstream art) and
design institutions, the creative industries, corporations, and
independent projects. It examines the grey areas of creative (idea)
control, the nuances of power exchange and what this means for
independent thinking artists and collectives working within
collaborative contexts, socially, culturally and ethically. It also
asks, whether new forms of DIWO can act as an inclusive commons. 

Whereby it consists of methods and values relating to ethical and ecological
processes, as part of its artistic co-creation; whilst maintaining its
original intentions as a decentralized method of peer empowerment in
today's multitude?

=Reference=

Part of the SEAD Working Group on White Papers - assembled in response to the following two objectives from US NSF NEA workshops: a) The NSF NSEAD workshop at MICA suggested the development of White Papers for research and advocacy leading to a common platform (Beyond Productivity 2 report as a follow on to Beyond Productivity, the report issued by the US National Research Council and directed by William Mitchell); present at conferences 2012-13. [http://seadnetwork.wordpress.com/about/]


[[Category:Art]]

[[Category:Articles]]