'''= ASI is a collective formed by Fetch.ai (FET), SingularityNET (AGIX), and Ocean Protocol (OCEAN) ... (which) ...aims to accelerate the advancement of decentralized Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) and, ultimately, Artificial Superintelligence (ASI)".''' [https://www.superintelligence.io/]

URL = https://www.superintelligence.io/


=Description=

"We are in a race to AGI and ASI. Either centralized Leviathans – Big Tech and the military – will
win the day, or an open network will take the prize. Centralized versus Decentralized. Which
future do you prefer? Our mission is to scale up our research and development engine to get
decentralized ASI in the race for the sake of humanity.

How? First of all, we merge our tokens: AGIX, FET and OCEAN. We convert existing AGIX,
FET and OCEAN tokens into the new $ASI. The total supply of $ASI will then be 2,630,547,141
tokens, composed of 866,700,367 allocated to AGIX tokens, 1,152,997,575 allocated to FET
tokens and 610,849,199 to OCEAN tokens.

This Alliance needs to show the public that decentralized AI can be applied today in ways that
make a real-world impact, and walk them down the path towards decentralized AGI and
decentralized ASI with a procession of continuously improving applications. This is exactly what
Fetch, SNET and Ocean have been doing for years: practical decentralized AI applications and
the infrastructure to make it all possible.

The Superintelligence Alliance will enable dramatic synergies beyond what could be achieved
by the three projects working side-by-side in a loose partnership. 


These ASI Alliance synergies ... :

● Fetch.ai brings a mature framework for delivering commercial solutions based on
decentralized agent systems and an AI-customized Layer 1 chain, proven via a host of
real-world applications

● Ocean brings a decentralized network for secure and ethical data management,
designed for the data requirements of large-scale AI systems and demonstrated in the
highly successful Predictoor framework

● SingularityNET brings a concrete technical path to AGI and ASI, going beyond what Big
Tech R&D teams are doing, integrated with a decentralized tech stack including an
agents framework, a ledgerless blockchain (HyperCycle with HYPC token) and a
decentralized compute fabric (NuNet with NTX token)


AGI cognitive architecture + scalable secure ethical data management + robust
commercialization, rolled out on a high-speed, low-cost decentralized network, equals an
unparalleled strategy for decentralized ASI success."

([https://434267010-files.gitbook.io/~/files/v0/b/gitbook-x-prod.appspot.com/o/spaces%2FE0eZgP8lxRNljW57Uw4H%2Fuploads%2FzuLTqcvU0P6PejPUONJG%2FArtificial%20Superintelligence%20(ASI)%20Alliance%20Vision%20Paper.pdf? pdf])



=More information=

* The ASI Vision Paper: [https://434267010-files.gitbook.io/~/files/v0/b/gitbook-x-prod.appspot.com/o/spaces%2FE0eZgP8lxRNljW57Uw4H%2Fuploads%2FzuLTqcvU0P6PejPUONJG%2FArtificial%20Superintelligence%20(ASI)%20Alliance%20Vision%20Paper.pdf? pdf]

"Artificial General Intelligence – when an AI system can perform all human tasks at minimally a
human level of competence – looms near. It seems clear the acceleration will continue past AGI,
straight to Artificial Superintelligence when AI systems perform at far-beyond human levels of
capability.
"

[[Category:Movements]]
[[Category:Intelligence]]
[[Category:Technology]]