Pan-asian or supra-regional resources related to the Asian continent.

For a list of pages see [[:Category:Asia]].

=Introduction=


Probably the best resource to monitor Asian developments, is [[Bytes for All]], maintained by Frederick Noronha [http://fn.goa-india.org] and team.

This list of participants at the Asia Commons conference [http://wikis.bellanet.org/asia-commons/index.php/Category:Participant] gives you an idea of who is active in the Commons-related fields in this continent.

The Directory of Democracy Bloggers [http://demologue.wikispaces.com/Directory+of+Democracy+Blogs] has a country-by-country overview of sources.

A good context for understanding [[A2K Access to Knowledge]] and [[Access to Health]] concerns, is this text by Jamie Love on [[Bilateral Free Trade Agreements and IP]]

A selection of English-language Asia blogs is made for the nominations of the [http://asiablogawards.com/ Best Asian Blog Awards]

Also check the Delicious Tag [http://del.icio.us/mbauwens/P2P-Asia P2P-Asia]

The following country pages are available: [[Burma]], [[China]], [[Hong Kong]], [[India]], [[Japan]], [[Malaysia]], [[Pakistan]], [[Philippines]], [[Singapore]], [[South Korea]], [[Taiwan]], [[Thailand]]

The selections below will be chosen in cooperation with Frederick Noronha.

=Directory=


==Digital Divide==


'''Asia-Pacific Development Information Programme''' [http://www.apdip.net/]


==Media==


[[Asia 24-7 TV]] [[Engage Media]]


==Open/free organizations==


[http://wikiwikiweb.de/LugsList '''Lugslist''']

List of GNU/Linux user groups across South Asia



[http://www.asiaosc.org/ '''Asian Open Source Centre - Asia OSC''']

Promote open source and free software in Asia.


==Advocates and activists==

* [[Sunil Abraham]]
* [[Fouad Riaz Bajwa]]
* [[Tyng-Ruey Chuang]]
* [[Rishab Aiyer Ghosh]]
* [[Lawrence Liang]]
* [[Jedi Lin]]
* [[Frederick Noronha]]
* [[Shankar Sankaran]]

=Books:=

Gan, S., J. Gomez and J. Uwe (eds.) (2004) '''Asian Cyberactivism''': Freedom of
Expression and Media Censorship. Bangkok: Friedrich Naumann Foundation.


=Essays:=

#George, C. (2003) ‘'''The Internet and the Narrow Tailoring Dilemma for ‘Asian’ Democracies'''’, Communication Review 6 (3): 247-268.
#Hachigian, N. (2002) ‘The Internet and Power in One-Party East Asian States’, Washington Quarterly 25(3): 41-58.


=Places=

DIYBio projects in Asia:

#Biomodd (LBA2) Philippines project http://www.biomodd.net/lba2
#HONF http://www.natural-fiber.com
#Singapore DIYbio event http://diybiosingapore.wordpress.com
#Tokyo Hackerspace http://tokyohackerspace.org/
#Tokyo Radiation Levels http://www.facebook.com/Tokyo.Radiation.Levels
#Tokyo Kids& Radiation community http://www.facebook.com/pages/Tokyo-Kids-Radiation/227762067240468


[[Category:Asia]]
[[Category:Continent]]