'''* Book: [[Assets in Common]]: Stories of Business and Community Leaders Remaking the Economy from the Ground Up. By Charity May, Jay Standish et al. Infrastructure for Shared Ownership, 2024''' 

URL = https://www.assetsincommon.org/

''"We showcase examples that already work at scale, led by people who had the odds stacked against them. These leaders have taken risks
few have been willing to take, and have done so at the rugged interface between communities in need and modern regulatory environments."''


=Contextual Quote=

"The United States economy is overdue for a shift towards equity and
democratic wealth building. As authors, we set out to reveal lesser-known
corporate forms and financial structures that leaders can use to enable
widespread transformation. We have compiled a curated selection of case
studies that demonstrate outstanding examples of an alternative economic
paradigm in action. In particular, we are excited about the potential of using
shared ownership forms as the core instrument for business ownership and
community asset stewardship.

'''This body of work is an attempt at figuring out how to scale steward ownership and shared ownership'''.

...

Throughout this book, we describe this in several ways.
We use language like ‘connective entities’ and ‘networked businesses’ to
describe what we call Infrastructure for Shared Ownership."

- Chelsea Robinson, from the Introduction


=Description=

"Some of the amazing companies profiled here include the Industrial Commons, Enspiral, Mondragon Corporation, Obran Cooperative, Goodworks Evergreen, Saradex, Sumitomo Group, Clegg Auto, and Calvert Community Investment.

One of the most intriguing aspects of the book is its discussion of what will be for many readers wholly new business models:

* Employee-owned holding companies

* Cross shareholding between banks and businesses

* Business-to-business marketplaces and currencies

* Municipal strategies for assets holdings

* Non-profit ownership of business networks "

(https://solidarityhall.substack.com/p/the-power-of-moving-assets-into-the)



=Contents=

Chelsea Robinson:

This book has four sections. This outline can help you decide which parts
interest you most. You can read this chronologically or jump around and
dip into different topics and case studies at your own pace.


==Part I – Opening==

The opening is an orientation. We provide a framing
narrative and explain our motivations. You will get
important key concepts from the opening which you
won’t get elsewhere. Even if you read only a handful
of other chapters, the opening is necessary for understanding the other sections.


==Part II – Living Proof: Case Studies==

Twelve in-depth case studies demonstrate diverse
examples of infrastructure for shared ownership. We
have focused on the mechanisms and gritty details of
how these operate internally. We have also captured
their context, history, and use case. Almost all case
studies were informed by those directly involved in
the projects. These are stories of pragmatic leadership and succeeding against the odds.


==Part III – Patterns, Mechanisms, and Challenges: An Analysis==

Our analysis covers topics that have recurred across
case studies. We unpack issues like mitigating the
downsides of cooperation and explicate success
factors like governance and culture. We have outlined
trends such as shared service provision and liquidity
through resource pooling. The analysis discusses
the nuances of the case studies and also adds more
examples.


==Part IV – Opportunities for Action==

We identify valuable strategies worth adopting. In this
section, you will find recipes for action. We cover how
to build a shared services company and how to design
a holding company founded on stewardship. Finally,
we advise on how funders can invest wisely in this
space."


=Excerpts=

==The Concepts Defined==

Chelsea Robinson:

"Shared ownership and steward ownership are key concepts throughout
the book, so let’s define them for you up front:

• [[Shared Ownership]] refers to business and property owner-
ship structures that distribute equity and control among a
wider group of stakeholders, such as employees, customers,
or community members. Shared ownership models create
more equitable and engaged economic participation through
structures like cooperatives, employee stock ownership
plans (ESOPs), and community land trusts.


* [[Steward Ownership]] is a corporate governance model that
ensures enduring independence and mission-driven focus
by placing a company’s shares in a trust or foundation. This
preserves the organization’s purpose and values beyond the
involvement of any individual leaders. Central to steward ownership is the strict separation of economic interest and governance. Rather than being privatized, profits are either reinvested
in the business and its stakeholders or donated to charity.
When shared and steward ownership are combined, we protect assets
and businesses for the long term, align financial interests with mission and
values, incentivize reinvestment instead of extraction, and build wealth for
all stakeholders.


'''This book extends the powerful concepts of shared ownership and stewardship by envisioning the integration of these units into somethinggreater.''' 

If we work together to build infrastructural institutions between our
entities and assets, we can create competitive ecosystems that more and
more entities can opt into. Building infrastructure for shared ownership will
promote the development of an economy running on different incentives
and principles. If matured, these kinds of ecosystems could offer resilient,
scalable alternatives to the default financial system.

..

Even after leaders restructure their community assets or company
into a stewardship format, they still experience the hostile pressures of
the extractive economy. Because of this edge effect between shared and
steward ownership formats and the rest of the economy, this book shows
how we can build corridors of connection between institutions.
Unlocking mutual support between entities can buffer against
adverse pressures to place profit above all else. It is possible to build
and share banking systems, currencies, employer-of-record companies,
no-interest loan pools, warehouses, and heavy machinery libraries.


...

* [[Conscious Consolidation]]: Many leaders are aggregating assets into unifying
entities like holding companies or multi-stakeholder
cooperatives. Achieving this via typical structures can
be a slippery slope to monopoly and cartel behavior.

However, when designed with shared ownership and
stewardship, these can create value for stakeholders
and long-term missions. Conscious consolidation can
help with efficiency gains and greater influence in the market.


* [[Shared Balance Sheets]]: Pooling assets in shared legal containers can cre-
ate mechanisms for resilience and liquidity at scale.

Putting many buildings, employees, business units,
funds, or loans onto shared balance sheets enables
pre-tax internal trade. These larger balance sheets can
be leveraged for growth, acquiring capital, extending
credit to allies, or buffering against losses and layoffs.

..

* Companies Cooperating: Connected entities create infrastructure for shared
ownership. Methods like cross-shareholding, or co-investment in co-owned services companies create
connective tissue between businesses and assets.
Entrepreneurship typically focuses on developing and
leading one project, but infrastructure projects require
entrepreneurial creativity in managing relationships between entities.

* [[Internal Network Trade]] and Complementary Currencies for Monetary Sovereignty: Monetary policy is typically considered the role of
the state. It determines how the central bank controls the money supply and promotes price stability. It
involves managing interest rates, setting bank reserve
requirements, and influencing credit availability in the
economy. These kinds of policies can be generated
within networks of businesses with shared resources.
Complementary currencies or internal network trade
can be opportunities to redefine the role and value of
money. Sovereign economic spaces can encode new
incentives and imbue meaning to money itself."


* [[Pools and Closed Circuits]]: Infrastructure for shared ownership frequently
emerges within walled gardens. Limiting participants can help mitigate the downside while generating shared benefits. In the default economy, this is achieved through systems like credit scores. In
contexts of shared ownership and stewardship, there
may be criteria of ‘fit’ for participating in a pool. One
business’ performance profile may make it more or
less suited to joining a group of other businesses.


* [[Seed Assets]]: In multiple case studies, people have used a seed
company or an asset base to start a network of entities. Seed assets may be a fully functioning, existing
entity such as a profitable business or a piece of land.

Seed assets may already have monetary value in the
default economy, which allows them to convert that
value into starting a shared utility. Seed assets may
also be of sufficient size and stability to invite other
smaller entities to join their fray. Many business owners could consider whether their business can play this
role. Many municipalities could consider whether their
public assets can be carefully financialised for regional development. "


==Beyond Cooperative Commonwealth to Stewardship Commonwealth==

Chelseau Robinson:

"During our research, we were delighted to explore the work of political economist Jessica Gordon Nembhard5. We will briefly explain her
work and ideas and how they offer a relevant vision. We will then add another dimension.

Nembhard is a scholar and activist whose work focuses on cooperative economics to empower marginalized communities and promote
racial and economic justice. Her research highlights the often-overlooked
history of African-American cooperative economic practices and their role
in the struggle for civil rights and equality. Nembhard advocates for the
development of cooperative businesses, credit unions, and other forms of
collective ownership as strategies for fostering resilience. We appreciate
how practical and urgent her voice is about what’s possible: “One of my pet
peeves is that we keep thinking we don’t know what to do, but we do know
because we have lots of models that have succeeded over the centuries,
even over the last 20 years. There are lots of examples of cooperative
solidarity economics that work, that deliver to people, that provide people
a say, a piece, that operate in a business model that can make money for
people. What we don’t have is enough will and enough education about
how to do it.”

One of her proposals is the vision for a Cooperative Commonwealth.

The Cooperative Commonwealth is one of the few ‘full stack’ visions for
a networked, equitable economy that we’ve found to be aligned with
our ideas. The cooperative commonwealth implies many levels of society incentivized towards democratic participation, wealth building, 
reinvestment, and stakeholder control. To paraphrase Elias Crim, the
Cooperative Commonwealth includes financial reforms such as the development of public banking and the widening of credit unions, processes to convert existing businesses to shared ownership, networks of affiliated
businesses, and a lifestyle that “gives people time for caregiving, volunteering, and continuous learning.”

In Nembhard’s own words, “Risks are collectivized, skills are perfected, learning is continuous, and surplus is shared in equitable ways, through real democratic decision-making. In a system of shared prosperity,
shared decision-making, and collective economic activity can spill over
into other social and political spaces, and enrich civil society, families, and
individual wellness. We do have examples of some of this. We have examples of sort of cooperative commonwealths where you have interlocking systems: a credit union that helps to develop worker co-ops and gives the
first loan to the co-op store to buy its own building. And then the co-op
store deposits its money in the credit union. And the credit union also
helps the neighborhood to start a housing co-op. And the housing co-op
members run their own security company and maintenance company as
worker-owned companies that also service the credit unions and the co-op
stores. The residents also have a co-op sewing factory, catering company,
child care center, etc. So that’s the kind of idea we have: that everybody
is part of several different co-ops, which service each other and provide
products and alternative financing. Some of the surplus from one co-op
venture can then be put into something else, like affordable housing or
other kinds of provisions, like collective utilities. So the notion is that we
don’t really have any one group, or one person running off with all the
spoils, right? The spoils are truly recirculating in the community. And the
community itself is the one who decides what happens to those resources”

The risk here is an over-emphasis on the ‘cooperative’ legal structure.
We’re advocating for a wider variety of legal structures. The interconnectedness of entities in Nembhard’s vision is aligned with ours. 

However, we believe that although coops have been a popular choice for shared ownership, they are not without issues. For example, coops are structurally incentivized to serve the wealth and health of their own members due
to their governance arrangements. In our vision, we would like to see the
vitality and resilience of communities and landscapes become part of the
success criteria of business activity. Rather than the priority being the
wealth-building of worker-owners, we see the priority as being an economy
that generates public goods.

For this reason, there is immense value in utilizing steward ownership. If a local utility company is owned by a trust that legally requires it to provide high-quality services and advance the environmental protections
of the region, that business will extend its mission far beyond optimizing for
profit share of its members. We admire and want to highlight Nembhard’s
extensive work in this area and also use this as an opportunity to distinguish the differences between a cooperative economy and a stewardship economy. For this reason, we offer the phrase ‘stewardship commonwealth’
as a possible iteration on this framing. We’re not claiming this concept to
be the most memorable or memetically powerful phrase, but it could be a
useful description in the interim as we all collectively articulate a vision for
a better economy."

=More information=

* Video: [[Derek Razo and Chelsea Robinson on Holding Assets in Common‎]]

* [[Infrastructure for Shared Ownership]]

[[Category:Open_Company_Formats]]
[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Books]]
[[Category:Commons]]