'''* Article: Assessing the Radical Democracy of [[Indymedia]]: Discursive, Technical, and Institutional Constructions. Victor W. Pickard. Critical Studies in Media Communication. Vol. 23, No. 1, March 2006, pp. 19-38'''


URL = http://www.victorpickard.com/upload/rcsm157052.pdf


=Abstract=

"This study examines the radical democratic principles manifest in Indymedia’s
discursive, technical, and institutional practices. By focusing on a case study of the
Seattle Independent Media Center and contextualizing it within theories and critiques of
radical democracy, this article fleshes out strengths, weaknesses, and recurring tensions
endemic to Indymedia’s internet-based activism. These findings have important
implications for alternative media making and radical politics in general."


=Excerpts=

Victor Pickard:

"Even casual observers will note that Indymedia puts forth a radical vision for
media democracy. Indymedia’s celebrated slogan, ‘‘be the media,’’ suggests that media
production and telling of stories is something to which all people should have access.

However, Indymedia’s radical democratic practice extends beyond website content
and mission statements to encompass institutional practices, use of internet
technology, and global network operations. To be more specific, Indymedia’s radical
democratic practice entails an active renegotiation of all power relationships by
democratizing the media (exemplified by an interactive web-based interface), leveling
power hierarchies (exemplified by consensus-based decision-making), and countering
proprietary logic (exemplified by open-source software). Inherent in these
practices are significant strengths, weaknesses, and recurrent tensions, which I trace in
the following case study of the Seattle Independent Media Center. I focus on how
Indymedia activists, through institutional practices and the amplifying effects of
internet technology, are actualizing radical democratic principles.

...

Aiming to empower marginalized voices, Indymedia
goes beyond advocating greater voice in policymaking or a seat at the table. It seeks
active re-appropriation and redistribution of space, technology, and other resources
to democratize society and thus would level all hierarchies. Thus, much of the
structure defining Indymedia as an institution can be described as anarchic (Epstein,
2001) or as ‘‘radical participatory democracy’’ (Polletta, 2002). My use of ‘‘radical
democracy’’ indicates an expansive version of participatory democracy that seeks
to equalize power hierarchies, correct structural inequities in all institutions,
and counter proprietary logic. Such radical democratic practices as Indymedia’s
consensus decision-making and open internet technology are invested with values of
inclusiveness, diversity, openness, co-operation, transparency, and collective decisionmaking."
(http://www.victorpickard.com/upload/rcsm157052.pdf)

=Author Details=

"Victor W. Pickard is a PhD candidate in the Institute of Communications Research at the University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign. Correspondence to: Victor W. Pickard, 1310 Lincolnshire Drive, Champaign, IL 61821,
USA. Email: vpickard@uiuc.edu. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the 2003 Association of Internet
Researchers conference in Toronto and the 2004 International Communication Association conference in New
Orleans. This paper derives from the author’s Master’s thesis at the University ofWashington under the direction
of Lance Bennett, and committee members David Domke and Kirsten Foot. The author thanks Ted Coopman,
Sascha Meinrath, and the editors and reviewers of CSMC for their suggestions. The author also gives special
thanks to past and present activists of the Seattle Independent Media Center."


[[Category:Articles]]

[[Category:Research]]

[[Category:Movements]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Peergovernance]]