
'''= an open, shared map of property rights'''

URL = https://atlasofownership.org/

=Contextual Quote=

"Over the many years we have been researching property and ownership — and during the months we have been working on the Atlas — two realisations have come back to us again and again.

First, that other forms of ownership and stewardship are possible. In fact, not only are they possible, they are already here. Some of them have been here for thousands of years.

But also, right now, all around the world, landowners, communities and governments are responding to the social, economic and environmental failure of our existing property systems by designing new, fairer ways to own and steward land and buildings.

They are running grounded, proven alternatives to the post-feudal systems of ownership that we have inherited.

More and more people are realising that if humanity is to flourish and prosper in the 21st century, redesigning the way we own land and property is going to be one of the most important reform projects of our time.

The good news is that the solutions we need to do it are already here, they’re just not very well distributed yet."

- Alastair Parvin [https://medium.com/open-systems-lab/to-redesign-ownership-we-need-a-map-e9c1f6c41546]


=Description=

"Other forms of ownership and tenure are possible. In fact, they are already here. Many have been around for thousands of years. Right now, all around the world, communities and countries are designing new, fairer ways to own and steward land and buildings. Historians are rediscovering ancient, traditional and indigenous models of ownership.

This Atlas has been created as a tool to help map that knowledge. Anyone can contribute, and the knowledge belongs to everyone.

Why? Because redesigning how we own land and property is the single most important reform project of our century. There is no path to a successful, flourishing future for humanity that does not include redesigning it.

The solutions that we need to do it are already here, we just need to find them."

(https://atlasofownership.org/about)


[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Maps]]
[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Peerproperty]]
[[Category:Maps]]
[[Category:Geography]]