

* [[John D. Schmidt and James Quilligan on the Commons and Integral Capital]]

* The [[Commons Podcast Series]]: podcasts accompagnying the syllabus by David Bollier, "The Rise of the Commons," 

#[[Property, Commons, and The Gift Economy]]: provides an overview of the philsophy behind private property rights, the fallacies of the "tragedy of the commons," and the moral and social dynamics of gift-exchange within communities. [http://bollier.org/audio/download/138/WK3-Bollier.mp3 download]
#[[History of Commons and Enclosure]]: A review of medieval commons, Peter Linebaugh's history of Magna Carta, and Karl Polanyi's The Great Transformation.[http://bollier.org/audio/download/139/WK4-Bollier.mp3 download]
#[[Dynamics of Modern Enclosure and Governing the Commons]]: A survey of modern enclosures as described by Bollier in Silent Theft; the human implicatiions of making resources alienable for market use; and an introduction to Elinor Ostrom's Governing the Commons. [http://bollier.org/audio/download/145/WK5-Bollier.mp3 download]
#[[Land as a Commons and Water as a Commons]]: A look at property rights as applied to land and water, and how certain commons-based approaches such as New Mexican acequias avoid the adverse consequences of market enclosure.  Readings by Eric Freyfogle, Maude Barlow, Adam Davidson-Harden and Jose A. Rivera. [http://bollier.org/audio/download/146/WK6-Bollier.mp3_.mp3 download]
#[[Atmosphere and Commons Trusts]]: Peter Barnes has been a pioneering thinker about how stakeholder trusts might be used to manage the atmosphere more equitably and effectively.  Readings from Barnes' Who Owns the Sky? and Capitalism 3.0:  A Guide to Reclaiming the Commons.  [http://bollier.org/audio/download/147/WK7-Bollier.mp3 download]
#[[Second Enclosure Movement, Copyright, Trademarks and Patents]]: The copyright wars against the public domain and fair use have been raging for more than 20 years now.  A review of its harm to culture and its general dynamics.  Readings by William Patry, David Bollier, and James Beesen/Michael J. Meurer [http://bollier.org/audio/download/148/WK8-Bollier.mp3 download]
#[[Internet as a Super-Commons]]: The end-to-end principles of the Internet and its shared protocols constitute a vital infrastructure for creating countless online commons.  This lecture gives a brief overview of this history, with readings by Lawrence Lessig, Richard Stallman, Eben Moglen, David Bollier, Elinor Ostrom and Charlotte Hess. [http://bollier.org/audio/download/149/W09-Bollier.mp3 download]
#[[New Genres of Collaborative Creativity and the Economics of Online Sharing]]: The Internet infrastructure, the GPL for software and the Creative Commons licenses have enabled the rise of rich new genres of collaborative creativity, from shared archives and wikis to remix music and the blogosphere.  This lecture looks at the "Great Value Shift" catalyzed by distributed media, with readings by Yochai Benkler, Michel Bauwens, David Bollier. [http://bollier.org/audio/download/150/W10-Bollier.mp3 download]
#[[Academia as a Commons]]: One of the more troubling market enclosures of the past generation is the croporate colonization of academia and its research.  We review Jennifer Washburn's University Inc., and selected chapters from Bollier's Silent Theft and Viral Spiral. [http://bollier.org/audio/download/151/W11-Bollier.mp3 download]



[[Category:Podcasts]]

[[Category:Commons Economics]]

[[Category:Commons]]

[[Category:Economics]]