=Resources=

Compiled by Valentin Spirik:

'''Audacity''' http://audacity.sourceforge.net/ is an open-source '''audio editor''', available for all major platforms. '''(*)'''

'''Ardour''' http://www.ardour.org/ "is a '''digital audio workstation'''. You can use it to record, edit and mix multi-track audio. ... If you've been looking for a tool similar to ProTools, Nuendo, Cubase SX, Digital Performer, Samplitude or Sequoia, you might have found it." For Linux and OS X (no Windows version), source code available.

'''Inkscape''' http://www.inkscape.org/ is an open-source '''vector graphics editor''', available for all major platforms.

The '''Gimp''' http://www.gimp.org/ is an open-source '''image manipulation programme''', available for all major platforms. To make the transition easier for Photoshop users there is also the GimpShop http://plasticbugs.com/?page_id=294.

'''CinePaint''' (Film Gimp) http://www.cinepaint.org/ is an open-source programme for '''deep paint manipulation and image processing''' (e.g. motion picture frame-by-frame retouching). An upcoming update is expected to support all major platforms.

'''ffmpegX''' http://www.ffmpegx.com/ is a popular shareware programme for '''transcoding video''' on the Mac, maybe not a tool that is easy to use, but works well once configured to one's needs. (The open-source '''VLC media player''' http://www.videolan.org/ can also be used for '''transcoding video''' and is available for '''all major platforms'''.)

'''Jashaka''' http://www.jahshaka.org/ is "the worlds first OpenSource '''Realtime Editing and Effects System'''", available for all major platforms.

'''LiVES''' http://lives.sourceforge.net/ is "a Free, Open Source '''video editor *and* a VJ tool'''." It is "fully cross platform for Linux and many flavours of Unix (e.g. BSD, openMosix, IRIX, OSX/Darwin)."

'''Kdenlive''' http://kdenlive.org/ is "a '''non linear video editor''' for the '''KDE''' environment running on '''Linux'''. It is based on the MLT video framework which relies on the FFMPEG project".

'''Cinelerra''' is a "'''non-linear video editor and compositor''' for Linux", there are two versions http://www.heroinewarrior.com/index.php3 and  http://cvs.cinelerra.org/.

'''Ubuntu Studio''' http://ubuntustudio.org/ is "A '''multimedia creation flavor of Ubuntu'''" and "aimed at the '''GNU/Linux audio, video and graphic enthusiast as well as professional'''. We provide '''a suite of the best open-source applications available for multimedia creation'''. Completely free to use, modify and redistribute. Your only limitation is your imagination."

'''Blender''' http://www.blender.org/ is an open-source '''3D modeling/animation programme''', available for all major platforms.

'''See also''' the Wikipedia [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IMovie '''iMovie'''] and [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Movie_Maker '''Windows Movie Maker'''] entries for basic (commercial) '''video editing software''' (en.wikipedia.org). A basic '''DV video editing software''' for '''Linux''' is the open-source [http://www.kinodv.org/ '''Kino'''] (www.kinodv.org).

'''(*)''' '''Mac OS X Audacity bug''': if you hear '''no sound''' when watching .flv videos (e.g. '''YouTube''') after using Audacity: Open Audio MIDI Setup (/Applications/Utilities/) and '''change the "Audio Output setting"''' from "96000.0Hz" '''back to "44100.0Hz"''' (see also [http://docs.info.apple.com/article.html?artnum=300832 '''Mac OS X: No audio from certain multimedia content''']). (docs.info.apple.com)



[[Category:Resources]]

[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Music]]

[[Category:Media]]