
=Resources=

Compiled by Valentin Spirik:

'''''Mac/PC/Linux:'''''

'''Audacity''' http://audacity.sourceforge.net/ '''for free audio capturing''' on OS X and Windows '''explained''' in this [http://digg.com/software/MP3myMP3_Recorder_saves_any_audio_you_hear_on_your_computer '''digg discussion'''] (digg.com).

The open-source '''Streamripper''' http://streamripper.sourceforge.net/ lets users '''record e.g. webradio as .mp3 files'''. For OS X users: StreamRipperX http://streamripperx.sourceforge.net/ (the old StreamRipperX 1.0.5 still works under OS X 10.3.9, not only 10.2 as mentioned).

'''KeepVid''' http://keepvid.com/ or '''Video Downloader''' http://javimoya.com/blog/youtube_en.php let users '''download Flash Videos''' from sites like YoutTube.

'''PodTube''' (OS X) and '''iTube''' (Windows) are for [http://www.epicempire.com/software/youtube-to-ipod.html '''YouTube to iPod''']. (www.epicempire.com) '''Note''': If this link is not working also try [http://www.indianwebmaster.org/showthread.php?t=174 '''The Amazing YouTube Tools Collection''']. (www.indianwebmaster.org)


'''''Mac:'''''

'''Wiretap''' http://www.ambrosiasw.com/utilities/wiretap/ "allows you to '''record audio from any running applications''', as well as from any microphone, line-in, headset...". Commercial software. ('''Free''' option '''via Audacity''': see above)

'''Snapz Pro X''' http://www.ambrosiasw.com/utilities/snapzprox/ "allows you to effortlessly '''record anything on your screen''', saving it as a QuickTime® movie or screenshot". Commercial software.

'''Copernicus''' http://danicsoft.com/projects/copernicus/ "doesn't just take '''screenshots'''... allows you to '''save''' directly to RAM, increasing movie framerates significantly for '''shorter movies'''". Requires OS X 10.4. Free commercial software.

'''Screen Mimic''' http://www.polarian.com/products/ScreenMimic.php "allows you to '''create screencasts (recordings of your Mac OS X desktop)''' that can be saved as Adobe Flash (SWF), Flash Video (FLV), or Quicktime (MOV) files". Requires OS X 10.4. Commercial software.

'''''PC:'''''

'''CamStudio''' http://www.camstudio.org/ is an open-source '''"Free Screen Recording Software"'''. Download via http://sourceforge.net/projects/camstudio/.

'''VH Screen Capture Driver''' http://www.free-codecs.com/download/VH_Screen_Capture_Driver.htm "is a DirectShow filter, which emulates Video Capture card and '''captures screen activity'''." Freeware.

List of '''Video Recording''' software from Softpedia http://www.softpedia.com/catList/112,0,1,0,1.html. Mainly commercial software, some freeware.

'''SnagIt''' http://www.softwarecasa.com/pprod/212401dd.htm "All the '''screen capture and editing functionality''' you’ll ever need, in one simply powerful program." Commercial software. ('''Free''' option '''via Audacity''': see above)

'''Camtasia Studio''' http://www.softwarecasa.com/pprod/212402dd.htm  "'''Full-Motion Screen Recording''' Software". Commercial software.

'''''Linux:'''''

'''recordMyDesktop''' http://recordmydesktop.sourceforge.net/ is an open-source software that "offers also the ability to '''record audio, along with video'''."


[[Category:Technology]]

[[Category:Media]]

[[Category:Resources]]