'''Book:  Augmented Urban Spaces. Articulating the Physical and Electronic City. Edited by Alessandro Aurigi, Newcastle University, UK and Fiorella De Cindio, University of Milan, Italy. Ashgate, 2009'''


URL = http://www.ashgate.com/default.aspx?page=637&calctitle=1&pageSubject=427&title_id=9648&edition_id=10636


=Description=

"There have been numerous possible scenarios depicted on the impact of the internet on urban spaces. Considering ubiquitous/pervasive computing, mobile, wireless connectivity and the acceptance of the Internet as a non-extraordinary part of our everyday lives mean that physical urban space is augmented, and digital in itself. This poses new problems as well as opportunities to those who have to deal with it.

This book explores the intersection and articulation of physical and digital environments and the ways they can extend and reshape a spirit of place. It considers this from three main perspectives: the implications for the public sphere and urban public or semi-public spaces; the implications for community regeneration and empowerment; and the dilemmas and challenges which the augmentation of space implies for urbanists. Grounded with international real -life case studies, this is an up-to-date, interdisciplinary and holistic overview of the relationships between cities, communities and high technologies."
(http://www.ashgate.com/default.aspx?page=637&calctitle=1&pageSubject=427&title_id=9648&edition_id=10636)



[[Category:Books]]

[[Category:Geography]]

[[Category:Villages]]

[[Category:Urbanism]]