
'''* "covers the entire domestic economy with detailed accounts of physical processes for all sectors".'''

URL = http://sustainable.unimelb.edu.au/australian-stocks-flows-framework


=Description=

"The ASFF covers the entire domestic economy with detailed accounts of physical processes for all sectors.  It explores sustainability issues that are long-term (over many decades), economy- and nation-wide, but with considerable sectoral and spatial detail (down to local government scale).  The ASFF research capability is a combined database and simulation system for analysing the sustainability of the Australian economy.  The ASFF covers the entire domestic economy with detailed accounts of physical processes for all sectors.  It explores sustainability issues that are long-term (over many decades), economy- and nation-wide, but with considerable sectoral and spatial detail (down to local government scale).  

While ASFF shares common features with complementary approaches (such as Mass Flow Analysis, Physical Input-Output Tables, and Life Cycle Analysis), it is distinctly and powerfully different from these because the biophysical processes throughout the economy and environment are represented explicitly.  
The simulation capability is grounded with a fully integrated database of the physical economy and environment.  Considerable data is drawn together from a range of sources detailing human, natural and industrial activity across all sectors throughout Australia over many decades.  

The simulation relationships and historical data calibration are fully transparent; these are also documented in a range of publications.

The framework can flexibly develop quantitative scenarios, for example, based on trends, historical inertia, and aspirations for the future, using a multitude of levers involving socio-economic behaviour, substitution possibilities and technological progress. "

[[Category:Australia]]

[[Category:P2P Accounting]]

[[Category:Thermodynamic Efficiencies]]